ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 


WITH 


A REPLY TO MAHATMA GANDHI 


"Know Truth as Truth and Untruth as Untruth " 
—BUDDHA 


"He that WILL NOT reason is a bigot He that CANNOT reason is a fool He that DARE 
NOT reason is a slave "H. DRUMMOND 


Printed from the third edition of 1944 


Contents 

1. Preface to the Second Edition 

2. Preface to the Third Edition 

3. Prologue 

4. Speech Prepared By Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 

5. Appendix I: A Vindication Of Caste By Mahatma Gandhi 

6. Appendix II: A Reply To The Mahatma By Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 


ANNIHILATION OF CASTE 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 


The speech prepared by me for the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore has had an 
astonishingly warm reception from the Hindu public for whom it was primarily intended. 
The English edition of one thousand five hundred was exhausted within two months of its 
publication. It is translated into Gujarati and Tamil. It is being translated in Marathi, 
Hindi, Punjabi and Malayalam. The demand for the English text still continues unabated. 
To satisfy this demand it has become necessary to issue a Second Edition. Considerations 
of history and effectiveness of appeal have led me to retain the original form of the 
essay—namely the speech form—-although I was asked to recast it in the form of a direct 
narrative. To this edition I have added two appendices. I have collected in Appendix I the 
two articles written by Mr. Gandhi by way of review of my speech in the Harijan, and his 
letter to Mr. Sant Ram, a member of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal. In Appendix II, I have 
printed my views in reply to the articles of Mr. Gandhi collected in Appendix 1. Besides 
Mr. Gandhi many others have adversely criticised my views as expressed in my speech. 


But I have felt that in taking notice of such adverse comments I should limit myself to 
Mr. Gandhi. This I have done not because what he has said is so weighty as to deserve a 
reply but because to many a Hindu he is an oracle, so great that when he opens his lips it 
is expected that the argument must close and no dog must bark. But the world owes much 
to rebels who would dare to argue in the face of the pontiff and insist that he is not 
infallible. I do not care for the credit which every progressive society must give to its 
rebels. I shall be satisfied if I make the Hindus realize that they are the sick men of India 
and that their sickness is causing danger to the health and happiness of other Indians. 


B. R. AMBEDKAR 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


The Second edition of this Essay appeared in 1937, and was exhausted within a very 
short period. A new edition has been in demand for a long time. It was my intention to 
recast the essay so as to incorporate into it another essay of mine called " Castes in India, 
their Origin and their Mechanism ", which appeared in the issue of the Indian Antiquary 
Journal for May 1917. But as I could not find time, and as there is very little prospect of 
my being able to do so and as the demand for it from the public is very insistent, I am 
content to let this be a mere reprint of the Second edition. 


I am glad to find that this essay has become so popular, and I hope that it will serve the 
purpose for which it was intended. 
22, Prithwiraj Road 


New Delhi 1st December 1944 B. R. AMBEDKAR 


PROLOGUE 


On December 12, 1935, I received the following letter from Mr. Sant Ram, the 
Secretary of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal : 


My dear Doctor Saheb, 


Many thanks for your kind letter of the 5th December. I have released it for press 
without your permission for which I beg your pardon, as I saw no harm in giving it 
publicity. You are a great thinker, and it is my well-considered opinion that none else has 
studied the problem of Caste so deeply as you have. I have always benefited myself and 
our Mandal from your ideas. I have explained and preached it in the Kranti many times 
and I have even lectured on it in many Conferences. I am now very anxious to read the 


exposition of your new formula—" It is not possible to break Caste without annihilating 
the religious notions on which it, the Caste system, is founded." Please do explain it at 
length at your earliest convenience, so that we may take up the idea and emphasise it 
from press and platform. At present, it is not fully clear to me. 


* * * * * 


Our Executive Committee persists in having you as our President for our Annual

Conference. We can change our dates to accommodate your convenience. Independent 
Harijans of Punjab are very much desirous to meet you and discuss with you their plans. 
So if you kindly accept our request and come to Lahore to preside over the Conference it 
will serve double purpose. We will invite Harijan leaders of all shades of opinion and you 
will get an opportunity of giving your ideas to them. 


The Mandal has deputed our Assistant Secretary, Mr. Indra Singh, to meet you at 
Bombay in Xmas and discuss with you the whole situation with a view to persuade you to 
please accept our request. 


The Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal, I was given to understand, to be an organization of Caste 
Hindu Social Reformers, with the one and only aim, namely to eradicate the Caste 
System from amongst the Hindus. As a rule, I do not like to take any part in a movement 
which is carried on by the Caste Hindus. Their attitude towards social reform is so 
different from mine that I have found it difficult to pull on with them. Indeed, I find their 
company quite uncongenial to me on account of our differences of opinion. Therefore 
when the Mandal first approached me I declined their invitation to preside. The Mandal, 
however, would not take a refusal from me and sent down one of its members to Bombay 
to press me to accept the invitation. In the end I agreed to preside. The Annual 
Conference was to be held at Lahore, the headquarters of the Mandal. The Conference 
was to meet in Easter but was subsequently postponed to the middle of May 1936. The 
Reception Committee of the Mandal has now cancelled the Conference. The notice of 
cancellation came long after my Presidential address had been printed. The copies of this 
address are now lying with me. As I did not get an opportunity to deliver the address 
from the presidential chair the public has not had an opportunity to know my views on 
the problems created by the Caste System. To let the public know them and also to 
dispose of the printed copies which are lying on my hand, I have decided to put the 
printed copies of the address in the market. The accompanying pages contain the text of 
that address. 


The public will be curious to know what led to the cancellation of my appointment as the 
President of the Conference. At the start, a dispute arose over the printing of the address. 
I desired that the address should be printed in Bombay. The Mandal wished that it should 
be printed in Lahore on the ground of economy. I did not agree and insisted upon having 
it printed in Bombay. Instead of agreeing to my proposition I received a letter signed by 
several members of the Mandal from which I give the following extract : 


27-3-36 
Revered Dr. Ji, 


Your letter of the 24th instant addressee to Sjt. Sant Ram has been shown to us. We were 
a little disappointed to read it. Perhaps you are not fully aware of the situation that has 
arisen here. Almost all the Hindus in the Punjab are against your being invited to this 
province. The Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal has been subjected to the bitterest criticism and has 
received censorious rebuke from all quarters. All the Hindu leaders among whom being 
Bhai Parmanand, M-L.A. (Ex-President, Hindu Maha Sabha), Mahatma Hans Raj, Dr. 
Gokal Chand Narang, Minister for Local Self-Government, Raja Narendra Nath, M.L.C. 
etc., have dissociated themselves from this step of the Mandal. 


Despite all this the runners of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal (the leading figure being Sjt. 
Sant Ram) are determined to wade through thick and thin but would not give up the idea 
of your presidentship. The Mandal has earned a bad name. 


* * * * ok 


Under the circumstances it becomes your duty to co-operate with the Mandal. On the 
one hand, they are being put to so much trouble and hardship by the Hindus and if on the 
other hand you too augment their difficulties it will be a most sad coincidence of bad luck 
for them. 


We hope you will think over the matter and do what is good for us all. 
*k * * * * 


This letter puzzled me greatly. I could not understand why the Mandal should displease 
me for the sake of a few rupees in the matter of printing the address. Secondly, I could 
not believe that men like Sir Gokal Chand Narang had really resigned as a protest 


against my selection as President because I had received the following letter from Sir 
Gokal Chand himself : 


5 Montgomery Road 
Lahore, 
7-2-36 
Dear Doctor Ambedkar,

I am glad to learn from the workers of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal that you have agreed 
to preside at their next anniversary to be held at Lahore during the Easter holidays, it will 
give me much pleasure if you stay with me while you are at Lahore. More when we meet. 


Yours sincerely, 
G. C. NARANG 


Whatever be the truth I did not yield to this pressure. But even when the Mandal found 
that I was insisting upon having my address printed in Bombay instead of agreeing to my 
proposal the Mandal sent me a wire that they were sending Mr. Har Bhagwan to Bombay 
to " talk over matters personally " Mr. Har Bhagwan came to Bombay on the 9th of April. 
When I met Mr. Har Bhagwan I found that he had nothing to say regarding the issue. 
Indeed he was so unconcerned regarding the printing of the address, whether it should be 
printed in Bombay or in Lahore, that he did not even mention it in the course of our 
conversation. All that he was anxious for was to know the contents of the address. I was 
then convinced that in getting the address printed in Lahore the main object of the 
Mandal was not to save money but to get at the contents of the address. I gave him a 
copy. He did not feel very happy with some parts of it. He returned to Lahore. From 
Lahore, he wrote to me 


the following letter : 
Lahore, 
dated April 14, 1936 
My dear Doctor Sahib, 

Since my arrival from Bombay, on the 12th, I have been indisposed owing to my 
having not slept continuously for 5 or 6 nights, which were spent in the train. Reaching 
here I came to know that you had come to Amritsar. I would have seen you there if I were 


well enough to go about. I have made over your address to Mr. Sant Ram for translation 
and he has liked it very much, but he is not sure whether it could be translated by him for 


printing before the 25th. In any case, it woud have a wide publicity and we are sure it 
would wake the Hindus up from their slumber. 


The passage I pointed out to you at Bombay has been read by some of our friends with 
a little misgiving, and those of us who would like to see the Conference terminate without 
any untoward incident would prefer that at least the word " Veda " be left out for the time 
being. I leave this to your good sense. I hope, however, in your concluding paragraphs 
you will make it clear that the views expressed in the address are your own and that the 
responsibility does not lie on the Mandal. I hope, you will not mind this statement of 
mine and would let us have 1,000 copies of the address, for which we shall, of course, 
pay. To this effect I have sent you a telegram today. A cheque of Rs. 100 is enclosed 
herewith which kindly acknowledge, and send us your bills in due time. 


I have called a meeting of the Reception Committee and shall communicate their 
decision to you immediately. In the meantime kindly accept my heartfelt thanks for the 
kindness shown to me and the great pains taken by you in the preparation of your 
address. You have really put us under a heavy debt of gratitude. 


Yours sincerely, 
HAR BHAGWAN 


P.S.—Kindly send the copies of the address by passenger train as soon as it is printed, 
so that copies may be sent to the Press for publication. 


Accordingly I handed over my manuscript to the printer with an order to print 1,000 
copies. Eight days later, I received another letter from Mr. Har Bhagwan which I 
reproduce below : 


Lahore, 
22-4-36 
Dear Dr. Ambedkar, 


We are in receipt of your telegram and letter, for which kindly accept our thanks. In 
accordance with your desire, we have again postponed our Conference, but feel that it 
would have been much better to have it on the 25th and 26th, as the weather is growing 
warmer and warmer every day in the Punjab. In the middle of May it would be fairly hot, 
and the sittings in the day time would not be very pleasant and comfortable. However, we 


shall try our best to do all we can to make things as comfortable as possible, if it is held 
in the middle of May. 


There is, however, one thing that we have been compelled to bring to your kind 
attention. You will remember that when I pointed out to you the misgivings entertained 
by some of our people regarding your declaration on the subject of change of religion, 
you told me that it was undoubtedly outside the scope of the Mandal and that you had no 
intention to say anything from our platform in that connection. At the same time when the

manuscript of your address was handed to me you assured me that that was the main 
portion of your address and that there were only two or three concluding paragraphs that 
you wanted to add. On receipt of the second instalment of your address we have been 
taken by surprise, as that would make it so lengthy, that we are afraid, very few people 
would read the whole of it. Besides that you have more than once stated in your address 
that you had decided to walk out of the fold of the Hindus and that that was your last 
address as a Hindu. You have also unnecessarily attacked the morality and 
reasonableness of the Vedas and other religious books of the Hindus, and have at length 
dwelt upon the technical side of Hindu religion, which has absolutely no connection with 
the problem at issue, so much so that some of the passages have become irrelevant and 
off the point. We would have been very pleased if you had confined your address to that 
portion given to me, or if an addition was necessary, it would have been limited to what 
you had written on Brahminism etc. The last portion which deals with the complete 
annihilation of Hindu religion and doubts the morality of the sacred books of the Hindus 
as well as a hint about your intention to leave the Hindu fold does not seem to me to be 
relevant. 


I would therefore most humbly request you on behalf of the people responsible for the 
Conference to leave out the passages referred to above, and close the address with what 
was given to me or add a few paragraphs on Brahminism. We doubt the wisdom of 
making the address unnecessarily provocative and pinching. There are several of us who 
subscribe to your feelings and would very much want to be under your banner for 
remodelling of the Hindu religion. If you had decided to get together persons of your cult 
I can assure you a large number would have joined your army of reformers from the 
Punjab. 


In fact, we thought you would give us a lead in the destruction of the evil of caste 
system, especially when you have studied the subject so thoroughly, and strengthen our 
hands by bringing about a revolution and making yourself as a nucleus in the gigantic 
effort, but declaration of the nature made by you when repeated loses its power, and 
becomes a hackneyed term. Under the circumstances, I would request you to consider the 
whole matter and make your address more effective by saying that you would be glad to 


take a leading part in the destruction of the caste system if the Hindus are willing to work 
in right earnest toward that end, even if they had to forsake their kith and kin and the 
religious notions. In case you do so, I am sanguine that you would find a ready response 
from the Punjab in such an endeavour. 


I shall be grateful if you will help us at this juncture as we have already undergone 
much expenditure and have been put to suspense, and let us know by the return of post 
that you have condescended to limit your address as above. In case, you still insist upon 
the printing of the address in toto, we very much regret it would not be possible—rather 
advisable for us to hold the Conference, and would prefer to postpone it sine die, 
although by doing so we shall be losing the goodwill of the people because of the 
repeated postponements. We should, however, like to point out that you have carved a 
niche in our hearts by writing such a wonderful treatise on the caste system, which excels 
all other treatises so far written and will prove to be a valuable heritage, so to say. We 
shall be ever indebted to you for the pains taken by you in its preparation. 


Thanking you very much for your kindness and with best wishes. 


Tam, 
Yours sincerely, 
HAR BHAGWAN 


To this letter I sent the following reply : 
27th April 1936 
Dear Mr. Har Bhagwan, 


I am in receipt of your letter of the 22nd April. I note with regret that the Reception 
Commitiee of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal " would prefer to postpone the Conference sine 
die " if I insisted upon printing the address in toto. In reply I have to inform you that I 
also would prefer to have the Conference cancelled—1 do not like to use vague terms—if 
the Mandal insisted upon having my address pruned to suit its circumstances. You may 
not like my decision. But I cannot give up, for the sake of the honour of presiding over 
the Conference, the liberty which every President must have in the preparation of the

address. I cannot give up for the sake of pleasing the Mandal the duty which every 
President owes to the Conference over which he presides to give it a lead which he thinks 
right and proper. The issue is one of principle and I feel I must do nothing to compromise 
it in any way. 


I would not have entered into any controversy as regards the propriety of the decision 
taken by the Reception Committee. But as you have given certain reasons which appear 
to throw the blame on me. I am bound to answer them. In the first place, I must dispel the 
notion that the views contained in that part of the address to which objection has been 
taken by the Committee have come to the Mandal as a surprise. Mr. Sant Ram, I am sure, 
will bear me out when I say that in reply to one of his letters I had said that the real 
method of breaking up the Caste System was not to bring about inter-caste dinners and 
inter-caste marriages but to destroy the religious notions on which Caste was founded 
and that Mr. Sant Ram in return asked me to explain what he said was a novel point of 
view. It was in response to this invitation from Mr. Sant Ram that I thought I ought to 
elaborate in my address what I had stated in a sentence in my letter to him. You cannot, 
therefore, say that the views expressed are new. At any rate, they are not new to Mr. Sant 
Ram who is the moving spirit and the leading light of your Mandal. But I go further and 
say that I wrote this part of my address not merely because I felt it desirable to do so. I 
wrote it because I thought that it was absolutely necessary to complete the argument. I 
am amazed to read that you characterize the portion of the speech to which your 
Committee objects as " irrelevant and off the point ". You will allow me to say that I am 
a lawyer and I know the rules of relevancy as well as any member of your Committee. I 
most emphatically maintain that the portion objected to is not only most relevant but is 
also important. It is in that part of the address that I have discussed the ways and means 
of breaking up the Caste System. It may be that the conclusion I have arrived at as to the 
best method of destroying Caste is startling and painful. You are entitled to say that my 
analysis is wrong. But you cannot say that in an address which deals with the problem of 
Caste it is not open to me to discuss how Caste can be destroyed. 


Your other complaint relates to the length of the address. I have pleaded guilty to the 
charge in the address itself. But, who is really responsible for this ? I fear you have come 
rather late on the scene. Otherwise you would have known that originally I had planned 
to write a short address for my own convenience as I had neither the time nor the energy 
to engage myself in the preparation of an elaborate thesis. It was the Mandal who asked 
me to deal with the subject exhaustively and it was the Mandal which sent down to me a 
list of questions relating to the Caste System and asked me to answer them in the body of 
my address as they were questions which were often raised in the controversy between 
the Mandal and its opponents and which the Mandal found difficult to answer 
satisfactorily. It was in trying to meet the wishes of the Mandal in this respect that the 
address has grown to the length to which it has. In view of what I have said I am sure you 
will agree that the fault respecting length of the address is not mine. 


I did not expect that your Mandal would be so upset because I have spoken of the 
destruction of Hindu Religion. I thought it was only fools who were afraid of words. But 


lest there should be any misapprehension in the minds of the people I have taken great 
pains to explain what I mean by religion and destruction of religion. I am sure that 
nobody on reading my address could possibly misunderstand me. That your Mandal 
should have taken a fright at mere words as "destruction of religion etc." notwithstanding 
the explanation that accompanies .them does not raise the Mandal in my estimation. One 
cannot have any respect or regard for men who take the position of the Reformer and then 
refuse even to see the logical consequences of that position, let alone following them out 
in action. 


You will agree that I have never accepted to be limited in any way in the preparation of 
my address and the question as to what the address should or should not contain was

never even discussed between myself and the Mandal. I had always taken for granted that 
I was free to express in the address such views as I held on the subject Indeed until, you 
came to Bombay on the 9th April the Mandal did not know what sort of an address I was 
preparing. It was when you came to Bombay that I voluntarily told you that I had no 
desire to use your platform from which to advocate my views regarding change of 
religion by the Depressed Classes. I think I have scrupulously kept that promise in the 
preparation of the address. Beyond a passing reference of an indirect character where I 
say that " I am sorry I will not be here. . . etc." I have said nothing about the subject in my 
address. When I see you object even to such a passing and so indirect a reference, I feel 
bound to ask ; did you think that in agreeing to preside over your Conference I would be 
agreeing to suspend or to give up my views regarding change of faith by the Depressed 
Classes ? If you did think so I must tell you that I am in no way responsible for such a 
mistake on your part. If any of you had even hinted to me that in exchange for the honour 
you were doing me by electing as President, I was to abjure my faith in my programme of 
conversion, I would have told you in quite plain terms that I cared more for my faith than 
for any honour from you. 


After your letter of the 14th, this letter of yours comes as a surprize to me. I am sure 
that any one who reads them will feel the same. I cannot account for this sudden volte 
face on the part of the Reception Committee. There is no difference in substance between 
the rough draft which was before the Committee when you wrote your letter of the 14th 
and the final draft on which the decision of the Committee communicated to me in your 
letter under reply was taken. You cannot point out a single new idea in the final draft 
which is not contained in the earlier draft. The ideas are the same. The only difference is 
that they have been worked out in greater detail in the final draft. If there was anything to 
object to in the address you could have said so on the 14th. But you did not. On the 
contrary you asked me to print off 1,000 copies leaving me the liberty to accept or not the 
verbal changes which you suggested. Accordingly I got 1,000 copies printed which are 
now lying with me. Eight days later you write to say that you object to the address and 


that if it is not amended the Conference will be cancelled. You ought to have known that 
there was no hope of any alteration being made in the address. I told you when you were 
in Bombay that I would not alter a comma, that I would not allow any censorship over 
my address and that you would have to accept the address as it came from me. I also told 
you that the responsibility. for the views expressed in the address was entirely mine and if 
they were not liked by the Conference I would not mind at all if the Conference passed a 
resolution condemning them. So anxious was I to relieve your Mandal from having to 
assume responsibility for my views and also with the object of not getting myself 
entangled by too intimate an association with your Conference, I suggested to you that I 
desired to have my address treated as a sort of an inaugural address and not as a 
Presidential address and that the Mandal should find some one else to preside over the 
Conference, and deal with the resolutions. Nobody could have been better placed to take 
a decision on the 14th than your Committee. The Committee failed to do that and in the 
meantime cost of printing has been incurred which, I am sure, with a little more firmness 
on the part of your Committee could have been saved. 


I feel sure that the views expressed in my address have little to do with the decision of 
your Committee. I have reasons to believe that my presence at the Sikh Prachar 
Conference held at Amritsar has had a good deal to do with the decision of the 
Committee. Nothing else can satisfactorily explain the sudden volte face shown by the 
Committee between the 14th and the 22nd April. I must not however prolong this 
controversy and must request you to announce immediately that the Session of the 
Conference which was to meet under my Presidentship is cancelled. All the grace has by 
now run out and I shall not consent to preside even if your Committee agreed to accept

my address as it is- in toto. I thank you for your appreciation of the pains I have taken in 
the preparation of the address. I certainly have profited by the labour if no one else docs. 
My only regret is that I was put to such hard labour at a time when my health was not 
equal to the strain it has caused. 


Yours sincerely, 
B. R. AMBEDKAR 


This correspondence will disclose the reasons which have led to the cancellation by the 
Mandal of my appointment as President and the reader will be in a position to lay the 
blame where it ought properly to belong. This is I believe the first time when the 
appointment of a President is cancelled by the Reception Committee because it does not 
approve of the views of the President. But whether that is so or not, this is certainly the 
first time in my life to have been invited to preside over a Conference of Caste Hindus. I 
am sorry that it has ended in a tragedy. But what can any one expect from a relationship 
so tragic as the relationship between the reforming sect of Caste Hindus and the self- 


respecting sect of Untouchables where the former have no desire to alienate their 
orthodox fellows and the latter have no alternative but to insist upon reform being carried 
out ? 


Rajgriha, 
Dadar, Bombay 14 15th May 1936 B. R. AMBEDKAR 
SPEECH PREPARED BY 
Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR 
FOR 
The 1936 Annual Conference of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore 
BUT NOT DELIVERED 


Owing to the cancellation of the Conference by the Reception Committee on the ground 
that the views expressed in the Speech would be unbearable to the Conference 


Friends, 


I am really sorry for the members of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal who have so very 
kindly invited me to preside over this Conference. I am sure they will be asked many 
questions for having selected me as the President. The Mandal will be asked to explain as 
to why it has imported a man from Bombay to preside over a function which is held in 
Lahore. I believe the Mandal could easily have found some one better qualified than 
myself to preside on the occasion. I have criticised the Hindus. I have questioned the 
authority of the Mahatma whom they revere. They hate me. To them I am a snake in their 
garden. The Mandal will no doubt be asked by the politically-minded Hindus to explain 
why it has called me to fill this place of honour. It is an act of great daring. I shall not be 
surprised if some political Hindus regard it as an insult. This selection of mine cannot 
certainly please the ordinary religiously-minded Hindus. The Mandal may be asked to 
explain why it has disobeyed the Shastric injunction in selecting the President. Accoding 
to the Shastras the Brahmin is appointed to be the Guru for the three Varnas, varnanam 
bramhano garu, is a direction of the Shastras. The Mandal therefore knows from whom a 
Hindu should take his lessons and from whom he should not. The Shastras do not permit 
a Hindu to accept any one as his Guru merely because he is well versed. This is made 
very clear by Ramdas, a Brahmin saint from Maharashtra, who is alleged to have inspired 
Shivaji to establish a Hindu Raj. In his Dasbodh, a socio-politico-religious treatise in 
Marathi verse Ramdas asks, addressing the Hindus, can we accept an Antyaja to be our 
Guru because he is a Pandit (i.e. learned) and gives an answer in the negative. What 
replies to give to these questions is a matter which I must leave to the Mandal. The 
Mandal knows best the reasons which led it to travel to Bombay to select a president, to 


fix upon a man so repugnant to the Hindus and to descend so low in the scale as to select 
an Antyaja— an untouchable—to address an audience of the Savarnas. As for myself you 
will allow me to say that I have accepted the invitation much against my will and also 
against the will of many of my fellow untouchables. I know that the Hindus are sick of 
me. I know that I am not a persona grata with them. Knowing all this I have deliberately 
kept myself away from them. I have no desire to inflict myself upon them. I have been 
giving expression to my views from my own platform. This has already caused a great 
deal of heartburning and irritation. I have no desire to ascend the platform of the Hindus 
to do within their sight what I have been doing within their hearing. If I am here it is 
because of your choice and not because of my wish. Yours is a cause of social reform.

That cause has always made an appeal to me and it is because of this that I felt I ought 
not to refuse an opportunity of helping the cause especially when you think that I can 
help it. Whether what I am going to say today will help you in any way to solve the 
problem you are grappling with is for you to judge. All I hope to do is to place before you 
my views on the problem. 


Il 


The path of social reform like the path to heaven at any rate in India, is strewn with 
many difficulties. Social reform in India has few friends and many critics. The critics fall 
into two distinct classes. One class consists of political reformers and the other of the 
socialists. 


It was at one time recognized that without social efficiency no permanent progress in 
the other fields of activity was possible, that owing to mischief wrought by the evil 
customs, Hindu Society was not in a state of efficiency and that ceaseless efforts must be 
made to eradicate these evils. It was due to the recognition of this fact that the birth of the 
National Congress was accompanied by the foundation of the Social Conference. While 
the Congress was concerned with defining the weak points in the political organisation of 
the country, the Social Conference was engaged in removing the weak points in the social 
organisation of the Hindu Society. For some time the Congress and the Conference 
worked as two wings of one common activity and they held their annual sessions in the 
same pandal. But soon the two wings developed into two parties, a Political Reform Party 
and a Social Reform Party, between whom there raged a fierce controversy. The Political 
Reform Party supported the National Congress and Social Reform Party supported the 
Social Conference. The two bodies thus became two hostile camps. The point at issue 
was whether social reform should precede political reform. For a decade the forces were 
evenly balanced and the battle was fought without victory to either side. It was however 
evident that the fortunes of the; Social Conference were ebbing fast. The gentlemen who 
presided over the sessions of the Social Conference lamented that the majority of the 


educated Hindus were for political advancement and indifferent to social reform and that 
while the number of those who attended the Congress was very large and the number 
who did not attend but who sympathized with it even larger, the number of those who 
attended the Social Conference was very much smaller. This indifference, this thinning of 
its ranks was soon followed by active hostility from the politicians. Under the leadership 
of the late Mr. Tilak, the courtesy with which the Congress allowed the Social 
Conference the use of its pandal was withdrawn and the spirit of enmity went to such a 
pitch that when the Social Conference desired to erect its own pandal a threat to burn the 
pandal was held out by its opponents. Thus in course of time the party in favour of 
political reform won and the Social Conference vanished and was forgotten. The speech, 
delivered by Mr. W. C. Bonnerji in 1892 at Allahabad as President of the eighth session 
of the Congress, sounds like a funeral oration at the death of the Social Conference and is 
so typical of the Congress attitude that I venture to quote from it the following extract. 
Mr. Bonnerji said : 


" IT for one have no patience with those who saw we shall not be fit for political 
reform until we reform our social system. I fail to see any connection between the two. . 
.Are we not fit (for political reform) because our widows remain unmarried and our 
girls are given in marriage earlier than in other countries ? because our wives and 
daughters do not drive about with us visiting our friends? because we do not send our 
daughters to Oxford and Cambridge ? " (Cheers) 


I have stated the case for political reform as put by Mr. Bonnerji. There were many 
who are happy that the victory went to the Congress. But those who believe in the 
importance of social reform may ask, is the argument such as that of Mr. Bonnerji final ? 
Does it prove that the victory went to those who were in the right ? Does it prove 
conclusively that social reform has no bearing on political reform ? It will help us to 
understand the matter if I state the other side of the case. I will draw upon the treatment 
of the untouchables for my facts. 


Under the rule of the Peshwas in the Maratha country the untouchable was not allowed

to use the public streets if a Hindu was coming along lest he should pollute the Hindu by 
his shadow. The untouchable was required to have a black thread either on his wrist or in 
his neck as a sign or a mark to prevent the Hindus from getting themselves polluted by 
his touch through mistake. In Poona, the capital of the Peshwa, the untouchable was 
required to carry, strung from his waist, a broom to sweep away from behind the dust he 
treaded on lest a Hindu walking on the same should be polluted. In Poona, the 
untouchable was required to carry an earthen pot, hung in his neck wherever he went, for 
holding his spit lest his spit falling on earth should pollute a Hindu who might 
unknowingly happen to tread on it. Let me take more recent facts. The tyranny practised 


by the Hindus upon the Balais, an untouchable community in Central India, will serve my 
purpose. You will find a report of this in the Times of India of 4th January 1928. "The 
correspondent of the Times of India reported that high caste Hindus, viz. Kalotas, Rajputs 
and Brahmins including the Patels and Patwaris of villages of Kanaria, Bicholi-Hafsi, 
Bicholi-Mardana and of about 15 other villages in the Indore djistrict (of the Indore State) 
informed the Balais of their respective villages that if they wished to live among them 
they must conform to the following rules : 


(1) Balais must not wear gold-lace-bordered pugrees. 
(2) They must not wear dhotis with coloured or fancy borders. 


(3) They must convey intimation of the death of any Hindu to relatives of the 
deceased—no matter how far away these relatives may be living. 


(4) In all Hindu marriages, Balais must play music before the processions and during 
the marriage. 


(5) Balai women must not wear gold or silver ornaments; they must not wear fancy 
gowns or jackets. 


(6) Balai women must attend all cases of confinement of Hindu women. 


(7) Balais must render services without demanding remuneration and must accept 
whatever a Hindu is pleased to give. 


(8) If the Balais do not agree to abide by these terms they must clear out of the 
villages. The Balais refused to comply; and the Hindu element proceeded against 
them. Balais were not allowed to get water from the village wells; they were not 
allowed to let go their cattle to graze. Balais were prohibited from passing through 
land owned by a Hindu, so that if the field of a Balai was surrounded by fields 
owned by Hindus, the Balai could have no access to his own field. The Hindus also 
let their cattle graze down the fields of Balais. The Balais submitted petitions to the 
Darbar against these persecutions ; but as they could get no timely relief, and the 
oppression continued, hundreds of Balais with their wives and children were 
obliged to abandon their homes in which their ancestors lived for generations and 
to migrate to adjoining States, viz. to villages in Dhar, Dewas, Bagli, Bhopal, 
Gwalior and other States. What happened to them in their new homes may for the 
present be left out of our consideration. The incident at Kavitha in Gujarat 
happened only last year. The Hindus of Kavitha ordered the untouchables not to 
insist upon sending their children to the common village school maintained by 


Government. What sufferings the untouchables of Kavitha had to undergo for 
daring to exercise a civic right against the wishes of the Hindus is too well known 
to need detailed description. Another instance occurred in the village of Zanu in 
the Ahmedabad district of Gujarat. In November 1935 some untouchable women 
of well-to-do families started fetching water in metal pots. The Hindus looked 
upon the use of metal pots by untouchables as an affront to their dignity and 
assaulted the untouchable women for their impudence. A most recent event is 
reported from the village Chakwara in Jaipur State. It seems from the reports that 
have appeared in the newspapers that an untouchable of Chakwara who had 
returned from a pilgrimage had arranged to give a dinner to his fellow 
untouchables of the village as an act of religious piety. The host desired to treat the 
guests to a sumptuous meal and the items served included ghee (butter) also. But 
while the assembly of untouchables was engaged in partaking of the food, the 
Hindus in their hundred, armed with lathis, rushed to the scene, despoiled the food 
and belaboured the untouchables who left the food they were served with and ran

away for their lives. And why was this murderous assault committed on 
defenceless untouchables ? The reason given is that the untouchable host was 
impudent enough to serve ghee and his untouchable guests were foolish enough to 
taste it. Ghee is undoubtedly a luxury for the rich. But no one would think that 
consumption of ghee was a mark of high social status. The Hindus of Chakwara 
thought otherwise and in righteous indignation avenged themselves for the wrong 
done to them by the untouchables, who insulted them by treating ghee as an item 
of their food which they ought to have known could not be theirs, consistently with 
the dignity of the Hindus. This means that an untouchable must not use ghee even 
if he can afford to buy it, since it is an act of arrogance towards the Hindus. This 
happened on or about the Ist of April 1936 ! 


Having stated the facts, let me now state the case for social reform. In doing this, I will 
follow Mr. Bonnerji, as nearly as I can and ask the political-minded Hindus " Are you fit 
for political power even though you do not allow a large class of your own countrymen 
like the untouchables to use public school ? Are you fit for political power even though 
you do not allow them the use of public wells ? Are you fit for political power even 
though you do not allow them the use of public streets ? Are you fit for political power 
even though you do not allow them to wear what apparel or ornaments they like ? Are 
you fit for political power even though you do not allow them to eat any food they like ? 
"IT can ask a string of such questions. But these will suffice, I wonder what would have 
been the reply of Mr. Bonnerji. I am sure no sensible man will have the courage to give 
an affirmative answer. Every Congressman who repeats the dogma of Mill that one 
country is not fit to rule another country must admit that one class is not fit to rule 
another class. 


How is it then that the Social Reform Party last the battle ? To understand this correctly 
it 1s necessary, to take note of the kind of social reform which the reformers were 
agitating for. In this connection it is necessary to make a distinction between social 
reform in the sense of the reform of the Hindu Family and social reform in the sense of 
the reorganization and reconstruction of the Hindu Society. The former has relation to 
widow remarriage, child marriage etc., while the latter relates to the abolition of the Caste 
System. The Social Conference was a body which mainly concerned itself with the 
reform of the high caste Hindu Family. It consisted mostly of enlightened high caste 
Hindus who did not feel the necessity for agitating for the abolition of caste or had not 
the courage to agitate for it. They felt quite naturally a greater urge to remove such evils 
as enforced widowhood, child marriages etc., evils which prevailed among them and 
which were personally felt by them. They did not stand up for the reform of the Hindu 
society. The battle that was fought centered round the question of the reform of the 
family. It did not relate to the social reform in the sense of the break-up of the caste 
system. It was never put in issue by the reformers. That is the reason why the Social 
Reform Party lost. 


I am aware that this argument cannot alter the fact that political reform did in fact gain 
precedence over social reform. But the argument has this much value if not more. It 
explains why social reformers lost the battle. It also helps us to understand how limited 
was the victory which the Political Reform Party obtained over the Social Reform Party 
and that the view that social reform need not precede political reform is a view which 
may stand only when by social reform is meant the reform of the family. That political 
reform cannot with impunity take precedence over social reform in the sense of 
reconstruction of society is a thesis which, I am sure, cannot be controverted. That the 
makers of political constitutions must take account of social forces is a fact which is 
recognized by no less a person than Ferdinand Lassalle, the friend and co-worker of Karl 
Marx. In addressing a Prussian audience in 1862 Lassalle said : 


" The constitutional questions are in the first instance not questions of right but questions 
of might. The actual constitution of a country has its existence only in the actual 
condition of force which exists in the country : hence political constitutions have value

and permanence only when they accurately express those conditions of forces which exist 
in practice within a society" 


But it is not necessary to go to Prussia. There is evidence at home. What is the 
significance of the Communal Award with its allocation of political power in defined 
proportions to diverse classes and communities ? In my view, its significance lies in this 
that political constitution must take note of social organisation. It shows that the 
politicians who denied that the social problem in India had any bearing on the political 


problem were forced to reckon with the social problem in devising the constitution. The 
Communal Award is so to say the nemesis following upon the indifference and neglect of 
social reform. It is a victory for the Social Reform Party which shows that though 
defeated they were in the right in insisting upon the importance of social reform. Many, I 
know, will not accept this finding. The view is current, and it is pleasant to believe in it, 
that the Communal Award is unnatural and that it is the result of an unholy alliance 
between the minorities and the bureaucracy. I do not wish to rely on the Communal 
Award as a piece of evidence to support my contention if it is said that it is not good 
evidence. Let us turn to Ireland. What does the history of Irish Home Rule show ? It is 
well-known that in the course of the negotiations between the representatives of Ulster 
and Southern Ireland, Mr. Redmond, the representative of Southern Ireland, in order to 
bring Ulster in a Home Rule Constitution common to the whole of Ireland said to the 
representatives of Ulster : " Ask any political safeguards you like and you shall have 
them." What was the reply that Ulstermen gave ? Their reply was " Damn your 
safeguards, we don't want to be ruled by you on any terms." People who blame the 
minorities in India ought to consider what would have happened to the political 
aspirations of the majority if the minorities had taken the attitude which Ulster took. 
Judged by the attitude of Ulster to Irish Home Rule, is it noting that the minorities agreed 
to be ruled by the majority which has not shown much sense of statesmanship, provided 
some safeguards were devised for them ? But this is only incidental. The main question is 
why did Ulster take this attitude ? The only answer I can give is that there was a social 
problem between Ulster and Southern Ireland the problem between Catholics and 
Protestants, essentially a problem of Caste. That Home Rule in Ireland would be Rome 
Rule was the way in which the Ulstermen had framed their answer. But that is only 
another way of stating that it was the social problem of Caste between the Catholics and 
Protestants, which prevented the solution of the political problem. This evidence again is 
sure to be challenged. It will be urged that here too the hand of the Imperialist was at 
work. But my resources are not exhausted. I will give evidence from the History of 
Rome. Here no one can say that any evil genius was at work. Any one who has studied 
the History of Rome will know that the Republican Constitution of Rome bore marks 
having strong resemblance to the Communal Award. When the kingship in Rome was 
abolished, the Kingly power or the Jmperium was divided between the Consuls and the 
Pontifex Maximus. In the Consuls was vested the secular authority of the King, while the 
latter took over the religious authority of King. This Republican Constitution had 
provided that, of the two Consuls one was to be Patrician and the other Plebian. The same 
constitution had also provided that, of the Priests under the Pontifex Maximus, half were 
to be Plebians and the other half Patricians. Why is it that the Republican Constitution of 
Rome had these provisions which, as I said, resemble so strongly the provisions of the 
Communal Award ? The only answer one can get is that the Constitution of Republican 
Rome had to take account of the social division between the Patricians and the Plebians, 


who formed two distinct castes. To sum up, let political reformers turn to any direction 
they like, they will find that in the making of a constitution, they cannot ignore the 
problem arising out of the prevailing social order. 


The illustrations which I have taken in support of the proposition that social and 
religious problems have a bearing on political constitutions seem to be too particular.

Perhaps they are. But it should not be supposed that the bearing of the one on the other is 
limited. On the other hand one can say that generally speaking History bears out the 
proposition that political revolutions have always been preceded by social and religious 
revolutions. 


The religious Reformation started by Luther was the precursor of the political 
emancipation of the European people. In England Puritanism led to the establishment of 
political liberty. Puritanism founded the new world. It was Puritanism which won the war 
of American Independence and Puritanism was a religious movement. The same is true of 
the Muslim Empire. Before the Arabs became a political power they had undergone a 
thorough religious revolution started by the Prophet Mohammad. Even Indian History 
supports the same conclusion. The political revolution led by Chandragupta was preceded 
by the religious and social revolution of Buddha. The political revolution led by Shivaji 
was preceded by the religious and social reform brought about by the saints of 
Maharashtra. The political revolution of the Sikhs was preceded by the religious and 
social revolution led by Guru Nanak. It is unnecessary to add more illustrations. These 
will suffice to show that the emancipation of the mind and the soul is a necessary 
preliminary for the political expansion of the people. 


Ill 


Let me now turn to the Socialists. Can the Socialists ignore the problem arising out of 
the social order ? The Socialists of India following their fellows in Europe are seeking to 
apply the economic interpretation of history to the facts of India. They propound that man 
is an economic creature, that his activities and aspirations are bound by economic facts, 
that property is the only source of power. They, therefore, preach that political and social 
reforms are but gigantic illusions and that economic reform by equalization of property 
must have precedence over every other kind of reform. One may join issue on every one 
of these premises on which rests the Socialists' case for economic reform having priority 
over every other kind of reform. One may contend that economic motive is not the only 
motive by which man is actuated. That economic power is the only kind of power no 
student of human society can accept. That the social status of an individual by itself often 
becomes a source of power and authority is made clear by the sway which the Mahatmos 
have held over the common man. Why do millionaires in India obey penniless Sadhus 
and Fakirs ? Why do millions of paupers in India sell their trifling trinkets which 


constitute their only wealth and go to Benares and Mecca ? That, religion is the source of 
power is illustrated by the history of India where the priest holds a sway over the 
common man often greater than the magistrate and where everything, even such things as 
strikes and elections, so easily take a religious turn and can so easily be given a religious 
twist. Take the case of the Plebians of Rome as a further illustration of the power of 
religion over man. It throws great light on this point. The Plebs had fought for a share in 
the supreme executive under the Roman Republic and had secured the appointment of a 
Plebian Consul elected by a separate electorate constituted by the Commitia Centuriata, 
which was an assembly of Piebians. They wanted a Consul of their own because they felt 
that the Patrician Consuls used to discriminate against the Plebians in carrying on the 
administration. They had apparently obtained a great gain because under the Republican 
Constitution of Rome one Consul had the power of vetoing an act of the other Consul. 
But did they in fact gain anything ? The answer to this question must be in the negative. 
The Plebians never could get a Plebian Consul who could be said to be a strong man and 
who could act independently of the Patrician Consul. In the ordinary course of things the 
Plebians should have got a strong Plebian Consul in view of the fact that his election was 
to be by a separate electorate of Plebians. The question is why did they fail in getting a 
strong Plebian to officiate as their Consul? The answer to this question reveals the 
dominion which religion exercises over the minds of men. It was an accepted creed of the 
whole Roman populus that no official could enter upon the duties of his office unless the

Oracle of Delphi declared that he was acceptable to the Goddess. The priests who were in 
charge of the temple of the Goddess of Delphi were all Patricians. Whenever therefore 
the Plebians elected a Consul who was known to be a strong party man opposed to the 
Patricians or " communal " to use the term that is current in India, the Oracle invariably 
declared that he was not acceptable to the Goddess. This is how the Plebians were 
cheated out of their rights. But what is worthy of note is that the Plebians permitted 
themselves to be thus cheated because they too like the Patricians, held firmly the belief 
that the approval of the Goddess was a condition precedent to the taking charge by an 
official of his duties and that election by the people was not enough. If the Plebians had 
contended that election was enough and that the approval by the Goddess was not 
necessary they would have derived the fullest benefit from the political right which they 
had obtained. But they did not. They agreed to elect another, less suitable to themselves 
but more suitable to the Goddess which in fact meant more amenable to the Patricians. 
Rather than give up religion, the Plebians give up material gain for which they had fought 
so hard. Does this not show that religion can be a source of power as great as money if 
not greater ? The fallacy of the Socialists lies in supposing that because in the present 
stage of European Society property as a source of power is predominant, that the same is 
true of India or that the same was true of Europe in the past. Religion, social status and 
property are all sources of power and authority, which one man has, to control the liberty 
of another. One is predominant at one stage; the other is predominant at another stage. 


That is the only difference. If liberty is the ideal, if liberty means the destruction of the 
dominion which one man holds over another then obviously it cannot be insisted upon 
that economic reform must be the one kind of reform worthy of pursuit. If the source of 
power and dominion is at any given time or in any given society social and religious then 
social reform and religious reform must be accepted as the necessary sort of reform. 


One can thus attack the doctrine of Economic Interpretation of History adopted by the 
Socialists of India. But I recognize that economic interpretation of history is not 
necessary for the validity of the Socialist contention that equalization of property is the 
only real reform and that it must precede everything else. However, what I like to ask the 
Socialists is this : Can you have economic reform without first bringing about a reform of 
the social order ? The Socialists of India do not seem to have considered this question. I 
do not wish to do them an injustice. I give below a quotation from a letter which a 
prominent Socialist wrote a few days ago to a friend of mine in which he said, " I do not 
believe that we can build up a free society in India so long as there is a trace of this ill- 
treatment and suppression of one class by another. Believing as I do in a socialist ideal, 
inevitably I believe in perfect equality in the treatment of various classes and groups. I 
think that Socialism offers the only true remedy for this as well as other problems." Now 
the question that I like to ask is : Is it enough for a Socialist to say, " I believe in perfect 
equality in the treatment of the various classes ? " To say that such a belief is enough is to 
disclose a complete lack of understanding of what is involved in Socialism. If Socialism 
is a practical programme and is not merely an ideal, distant and far off, the question for a 
Socialist is not whether he believes in equality. The question for him is whether he minds 
one class ill-treating and suppressing another class as a matter of system, as a matter of 
principle and thus allow tyranny and oppression to continue to divide one class from 
another. Let me analyse the factors that are involved in the realization of Socialism in 
order to explain fully my point. Now it is obvious that the economic reform contemplated 
by the Socialists cannot come about unless there is a revolution resulting in the seizure of 
power. That seizure of power must be by a proletariat. The first question I ask is : Will 
the proletariat of India combine to bring about this revolution ? What will move men to

such an action ? It seems to me that other things being equal the only thing that will move 
one man to take such an action is the feeling that other man with whom he is acting are 
actuated by feeling of equality and fraternity and above all of justice. Men will not join in 
a revolution for the equalization of property unless they know that after the revolution is 
achieved they will be treated equally and that there will be no discrimination of caste and 
creed. The assurance of a socialist leading the revolution that he does not believe in caste, 
I am sure, will not suffice. The assurance must be the assurance proceeding from much 
deeper foundation, namely, the mental attitude of the compatriots towards one another in 
their spirit of personal equality and fraternity. Can it be said that the proletariat of India, 
poor as it is, recognise no distinctions except that of the rich and the poor ? Can it be said 


that the poor in India recognize no such distinctions of caste or creed, high or low ? If the 
fact is that they do, what unity of front can be expected from such a proletariat in its 
action against the rich ? How can there be a revolution if the proletariat cannot present a 
united front? Suppose for the sake of argument that by some freak of fortune a revolution 
does take place and the Socialists come in power, will they not have to deal with the 
problems created by the particular social order prevalent in India ? I can't see how a 
Socialist State in India can function for a second without having to grapple with the 
problems created by the prejudices which make Indian people observe the distinctions of 
high and low, clean and unclean. If Socialists are not to be content with the mouthing of 
fine phrases, if the Socialists wish to make Socialism a definite reality then they must 
recognize that the problem of social reform is fundamental and that for them there is no 
escape from it. That, the social order prevalent in India is a matter which a Socialist must 
deal with, that unless he does so he cannot achieve his revolution and that if he does 
achieve it as a result of good fortune he will have to grapple with it if he wishes to realize 
his ideal, is a proposition which in my opinion is incontrovertible. He will be compelled 
to take account of caste after revolution if he does not take account of it before 
revolution. This is only another way of saying that, turn in any direction you like, caste is 
the monster that crosses your path. You cannot have political reform, you cannot have 
economic reform, unless you kill this monster. 


IV 


It is a pity that Caste even today has its defenders. The defences are many. It is 
defended on the ground that the Caste System is but another name for division of labour 
and if division of labour is a necessary feature of every civilized society then it is argued 
that there is nothing wrong in the Caste System. Now the first thing is to be urged against 
this view is that Caste System is not merely division of labour. It is also a division of 
labourers. Civilized society undoubtedly needs division of labour. But in no civilized 
society is division of labour accompanied by this unnatural division of labourers into 
watertight compartments. Caste System is not merely a division of labourers which is 
quite different from division of labour—it is an hierarchy in which the divisions of 
labourers are graded one above the other. In no other country is the division of labour 
accompanied by this gradation of labourers. There is also a third point of criticism against 
this view of the Caste System. This division of labour is not spontaneous; it is not based 
on natural aptitudes. Social and individual efficiency requires us to develop the capacity 
of an individual to the point of competency to choose and to make his own career. This 
principle is violated in the Caste System in so far as it involves an attempt to appoint 
tasks to individuals in advance, selected not on the basis of trained original capacities, but 
on that of the social status of the parents. Looked at from another point of view this 
stratification of occupations which is the result of the Caste System is positively 


pernicious. Industry is never static. It undergoes rapid and abrupt changes. With such 
changes an individual must be free to change his occupation. Without such freedom to 
adjust himself to changing circumstances it would be impossible for him to gain his

livelihood. Now the Caste System will not allow Hindus to take to occupations where 
they are wanted if they do not belong to them by heredity. If a Hindu is seen to starve 
rather than take to new occupations not assigned to his Caste, the reason is to be found in 
the Caste System. By not permitting readjustment of occupations, caste becomes a direct 
cause of much of the unemployment we see in the country. As a form of division of 
labour the Caste system suffers from another serious defect. The division of labour 
brought about by the Caste System is not a division based on choice. Individual 
sentiment, individual preference has no place in it. It is based on the dogma of 
predestination. Considerations of social efficiency would compel us to recognize that the 
greatest evil in the industrial system is not: so much poverty and the suffering that it 
involves as the fact that so many persons have callings which make no appeal to those 
who are engaged in them. Such callings constantly provoke one to aversion, ill will and 
the desire to evade. There are many occupations in India which on account of the fact that 
they are regarded as degraded by the Hindus provoke those who are engaged in them to 
aversion. There is a constant desire to evade and escape from such occupations which 
arises solely because of the blighting effect which they produce upon those who follow 
them owing to the slight and stigma cast upon them by the Hindu religion. What 
efficiency can there be in a system under which neither men's hearts nor their minds are 
in their work? As an economic organization Caste is therefore a harmful institution, 
inasmuch as, it involves the subordination of man's natural powers and inclinations to the 
exigencies of social rules 


V 


Some have dug a biological trench in defence of the Caste System. It is said that the 
object of Caste was to preserve purity of race and purity of blood. Now ethnologists are 
of opinion that men of pure race exist nowhere and that there has been a mixture of all 
races in all parts of the world. Especially is this the case with the people of India. Mr. D. 
R. Bhandarkar in his paper on Foreign Elements in the Hindu Population has stated that " 
There is hardly a class, or Caste in India which has not a foreign strain in it. There is an 
admixture of alien blood not only among the warrior classes—the Rajputs and the 
Marathas—but also among the Brahmins who are under the happy delusion that they are 
free from all foreign elements." The Caste system cannot be said to have grown as a 
means of preventing the admixture of races or as a means of maintaining purity of blood. 
As a matter of fact Caste system came into being long after the different races of India 
had commingled in blood and culture. To hold that distinctions of Castes or really 
distinctions of race and to treat different Castes as though they were so many different 


races is a gross perversion of facts. What racial affinity is there between the Brahmin of 
the Punjab and the Brahmin of Madras ? What racial affinity is there between the 
untouchable of Bengal and the untouchable of Madras ? What racial difference is there 
between the Brahmin of the Punjab and the Chamar of the Punjab ? What racial 
difference is there between the Brahmin of Madras and the Pariah of Madras ? The 
Brahmin of the Punjab is racially of the same stock as the Chamar of the Punjab and the 
Brahmin of Madras is of the same race as the Pariah of Madras. Caste system does not 
demarcate racial division. Caste system is a social division of people of the same race. 
Assuming it, however, to be a case of racial divisions one may ask : What harm could 
there be if a mixture of races and of blood was permitted to take place in India by 
intermarriages between different Castes ? Men are no doubt divided from animals by so 
deep a distinction that science recognizes men and animals as two distinct species. But 
even scientists who believe in purity of races do not assert that the different races 
constitute different species of men. They are only varieties of one and the same species. 
As such they can interbreed and produce an offspring which is capable of breeding and 
which is not sterile. An immense lot of nonsense is talked about heredity and eugenics in 
defence of the Caste System. Few would object to the Caste System if it was in accord 
with the basic principle of eugenics because few can object to the improvement of the

race by judicious noting. But one fails to understand how the Caste System secures 
judicious mating. Caste System is a negative thing. It merely prohibits persons belonging 
to different Castes from intermarrying. It is not a positive method of selecting which two 
among a given Caste should marry. If Caste is eugenic in origin then the origin of sub- 
Castes must also be eugenic. But can any one seriously maintain that the origin of sub- 
Castes is eugenic ? I think it would be absurd to contend for such a proposition and for a 
very obvious reason. If Caste means race then differences of sub-Castes cannot mean 
differences of race because sub-Castes become ex hypothesia sub-divisions of one and 
the same race. Consequently the bar against intermarrying and interdining between sub- 
Castes cannot be for the purpose of maintaining purity of race or of blood. If sub-Castes 
cannot be eugenic in origin there cannot be any substance in the contention that Caste is 
eugenic in origin. Again if Caste is eugenic in origin one can understand the bar against 
intermarriage. But what is the purpose of the interdict placed on interdining between 
Castes and sub-Castes alike ? Interdining cannot infect blood and therefore cannot be the 
cause either of the improvement or of deterioration of the race. This shows that Caste has 
no scientific origin and that those who are attempting to give it an eugenic basis are 
trying to support by science what is grossly unscientific. Even today eugenics cannot 
become a practical possibility unless we have definite knowledge regarding the laws of 
heredity. Prof. Bateson in his Mendel's Principles of Heredity says, " There is nothing in 
the descent of the higher mental qualities to suggest that they follow any single system of 
transmission. It is likely that both they and the more marked developments of physical 
powers result rather from the coincidence of numerous factors than from the possession 


of any one genetic element." To argue that the Caste System was eugenic in its 
conception is to attribute to the forefathers of present-day Hindus a knowledge of 
heredity which even the modern scientists do not possess. A tree should be judged by the 
fruits it yields. If caste is eugenic what sort of a race of men it should have produced ? 
Physically speaking the Hindus are a C3 people. They are a race of Pygmies and dwarfs 
stunted in stature and wanting in stamina. It is a nation 9/1Oths of which is declared to be 
unfit for military service. This shows that the Caste System does not embody the 
eugenics of modem scientists. It is a social system which embodies the arrogance and 
selfishness of a perverse section of the Hindus who were superior enough in social status 
to set it in fashion and who had authority to force it on their inferiors. 


VI 


Caste does not result in economic efficiency. Caste cannot and has not improved the 
race. Caste has however done one thing. It has completely disorganized and demoralized 
the Hindus. 


The first and foremost thing that must be recognized is that Hindu Society is a myth. 
The name Hindu is itself a foreign name. It was given by the Mohammedans to the 
natives for the purpose of distinguishing themselves. It does not occur in any Sanskrit 
work prior to the Mohammedan invasion. They did not feel the necessity of a common 
name because they had no conception of their having constituted a community. Hindu 
society as such does not exist. It is only a collection of castes. Each caste is conscious of 
its existence. Its survival is the be all and end all of its existence. Castes do not even form 
a federation. A caste has no feeling that it is affiliated to other castes except when there is 
a Hindu-Muslim riot. On all other occasions each caste endeavours to segregate itself and 
to distinguish itself from other castes. Each caste not only dines among itself and marries 
among itself but each caste prescribes its own distinctive dress. What other explanation 
can there be of the innumerable styles of dress worn by the men and women of India 
which so amuse the tourists ? Indeed the ideal Hindu must be like a rat living in his own 
hole refusing to have any contact with others. There is an utter lack among the Hindus of 
what the sociologists call " consciousness of kind ". There is no Hindu consciousness of 
kind. In every Hindu the consciousness that exists is the consciousness of his caste. That

is the reason why the Hindus cannot be said to form a society or a nation. There are 
however many Indians whose patriotism does not permit them to admit that Indians are 
not a nation, that they are only an amorphous mass of people. They have insisted that 
underlying the apparent diversity there is a fundamental unity which marks the life of the 
Hindus in as much as there is a similarity of habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts 
which obtain all over the continent of India. Similarity in habits and customs, beliefs and 
thoughts there is. But one cannot accept the conclusion that therefore, the Hindus 


constitute a society. To do so is to misunderstand the essentials which go to make up a 
society. Men do not become a society by living in physical proximity any more than a 
man ceases to be a member of his society by living so many miles away from other men. 
Secondly similarity in habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts is not enough to 
constitute men into society. Things may be passed physically from one to another like 
bricks. In the same way habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts of one group may be 
taken over by another group and there may thus appear a similarity between the two. 
Culture spreads by diffusion and that is why one finds similarity between various 
primitive tribes in the matter of their habits and customs, beliefs and thoughts, although 
they do not live in proximity. But no one could say that because there was this similarity 
the primitive tribes constituted one society. This is because similarly in certain things is 
not enough to constitute a society. Men constitute a society because they have things 
which they possess in common. To have similar thing is totally different from possessing 
things in common. And the only way by which men can come to possess things in 
common with one another is by being in communication with one another. This is merely 
another way of saying that Society continues to exist by communication indeed in 
communication. To make it concrete, it is not enough if men act in a way which agrees 
with the acts of others. Parallel activity, even if similar, is not sufficient to bind men into 
a society. This is proved by the fact that the festivals observed by the different Castes 
amongst the Hindus are the same. Yet these parallel performances of similar festivals by 
the different castes have not bound them into one integral whole. For that purpose what is 
necessary is for a man to share and participate in a common activity so that the same 
emotions are aroused in him that animate the others. Making the individual a sharer or 
partner in the associated activity so that he feels its success as his success, its failure as 
his failure is the real thing that binds men and makes a society of them. The Caste System 
prevents common activity and by preventing common activity it has prevented the 
Hindus from becoming a society with a unified life and a consciousness of its own being. 


VI 


The Hindus often complain of the isolation and exclusiveness of a gang or a clique and 
blame them for anti-social spirit. But they conveniently forget that this anti-social spirit is 
the worst feature of their own Caste System. One caste enjoys singing a hymn of hate 
against another caste as much as the Germans did in singing their hymn of hate against 
the English during the last war. The literature of the Hindus is full of caste genealogies in 
which an attempt is made to give a noble origin to one caste and an ignoble origin to 
other castes. The Sahyadrikhand is a notorious instance of this class of literature. This 
anti-social spirit is not confined to caste alone. It has gone deeper and has poisoned the 
mutual relations of the sub-castes as well. In my province the Golak Brahmins, Deorukha 
Brahmins, Karada Brahmins, Palshe Brahmins and Chitpavan Brahmins, all claim to be 


sub-divisions of the Brahmin Caste. But the anti-social spirit that prevails between them 
is quite as marked and quite as virulent as the anti-social spirit that prevails between them 
and other non-Brahmin castes. There is nothing strange in this. An anti-social spirit is 
interests of its own " which shut it out from full 


" " 


found wherever one group has 
interaction with other groups, so that its prevailing purpose is protection of what it has 
got. This anti-social spirit, this spirit of protecting its own interests is as much a marked

feature of the different castes in their isolation from one another as it is of nations in their 
isolation. The Brahmin's primary concern is to protect " his interest " against those of the 
non-Brahmins and the non-Brahmin's primary concern is to protect their interests against 
those of the Brahmins. The Hindus, therefore, are not merely an assortment of castes but 
they are so many warring groups each living for itself and for its selfish ideal. There is 
another feature of caste which is deplorable. The ancestors of the present-day English 
fought on one side or the other in the wars of the Roses and the Cromwellian War. But 
the decendents of those who fought on the one side do not bear any animosity— any 
grudge against the descendents of those who fought on the other side. The feud is 
forgotten. But the present-day non-Brahmins cannot forgive the present-day Brahmins for 
the insult their ancestors gave to Shivaji. The present-day Kayasthas will not forgive the 
present-day Brahmins for the infamy cast upon their forefathers by the forefathers of the 
latter. To what is this difference due ? Obviously to the Caste System. The existence of 
Caste and Caste Consciousness has served to keep the memory of past feuds between 
castes green and has prevented solidarity. 


Vill 


The recent discussion about the excluded and partially included areas has served to 
draw attention to the position of what are called the aboriginal tribes in India. They 
number about 13 millions if not more. Apart from the questions whether their exclusion 
from the new Constitution is proper or improper, the fact still remains that these 
aborigines have remained in their primitive uncivilized State in a land which boasts of a 
civilization thousands of years old. Not only are they not civilized but some of them 
follow pursuits which have led to their being classified as criminals. Thirteen millions of 
people living in the midst of civilization are still in a savage state and are leading the life 
of hereditary criminals! ! But the Hindus have never felt ashamed of it. This is a 
phenomenon which in my view is quite unparalleled. What is the cause of this shameful 
state of affairs ? Why has no attempt been made to civilize these aborigines and to lead 
them to take to a more honourable way of making a living ? The Hindus will probably 
seek to account for this savage state of the aborigines by attributing to them congenital 
stupidity. They will probably not admit that the aborigines have remained savages 
because they had made no effort to civilize them, to give them medical aid, to reform 
them, to make them good citizens. But supposing a Hindu wished to do what the 


Christian missionary is doing for these aborigines, could he have done it ? I submit not. 
Civilizing the aborigines means adopting them as your own, living in their midst, and 
cultivating fellow-feeling, in short loving them. How is it possible for a Hindu to do this ? 
His whole life is one anxious effort to preserve his caste. Caste is his precious possession 
which he must save at any cost. He cannot consent to lose it by establishing contact with 
the aborigines the remnants of the hateful Anary as of the Vedic days. Not that a Hindu 
could not be taught the sense of duty to fallen humanity, but the trouble is that no amount 
of sense of duty can enable him to overcome his duty to preserve his caste. Caste is, 
therefore, the real explanation as to why the Hindu has let the savage remain a savage in 
the midst of his civilization without blushing or without feeling any sense of remorse or 
repentance. The Hindu has not realized that these aborigines are a source of potential 
danger. If these savages remain savages they may not do any harm to the Hindus. But if 
they are reclaimed by non-Hindus and converted to their faiths they will swell the ranks 
of the enemies of the Hindus. If this happens the Hindu will have to thank himself and his 
Caste System. 


Ix 


Not only has the Hindu made no effort for the humanitarian cause of civilizing the 
savages but the higher-caste Hindus have deliberately prevented the lower castes who are 
within the pale of Hinduism from rising to the cultural level of the higher castes. 1. will 
give two instances, one of the Sonars and the other of the Pathare Prabhus. Both are 
communities quite well-known in Maharashtra. Like the rest of the communities desiring

to raise their status these two communities were at one time endeavouring to adopt some 
of the ways and habits of the Brahmins. The Sonars were styling themselves Daivadnya 
Brahmins and were wearing their " dhotis " with folds on and using the word namaskar 


for salutation. Both, the folded way of wearing the " dhoti " and the namaskar were 
special to the Brahmins. The Brahmins did not like this imitation and this attempt by 
Sonars to pass off as Brahmins. Under the authority of the Peshwas the Brahmins 
successfully put down this attempt on the part. of the Sonars to adopt the ways of the 
Brahmins. They even got the President of the Councils of the East India Company's 
settlement in Bombay to issue a. prohibitory order against the Sonars residing in 
Bombay. At one time the Pathare Prabhus had widow-remarriage as a custom of their 
caste. This custom of widow-remarriage was later on looked upon as amark of social 
inferiority by some members of the caste especially because it was contrary to the custom 
prevalent among the Brahmins. With the object of raising the status of their community 
some Pathare Prabhus sought to stop this practice of widow-remarriage that was 
prevalent in their caste. The community was divided into two camps, one for and the 
other against the innovation. The Peshwas took the side of those in favour of widow- 
remarriage and thus virtually prohibited the Pathare Prabhus from following the ways of 


the Brahmins. The Hindus criticise the Mohammedans for having spread their religion by 
the use of the sword. They also ridicule Christianity on the score of the inquisition. But 
really speaking who is better and more worthy of our respect—the Mohammedans and 
Christians who attempted to thrust down the throats of unwilling persons what they 
regarded as necessary for their salvation or the Hindu who would not spread the light, 
who would endeavour to keep others in darkness, who would not consent to share his 
intellectual and social inheritance with those who are ready and willing to make it a part 
of their own make-up ? I have no hesitation in saying that if the Mohammedan has been 
cruel the Hindu has been mean and meanness is worse than cruelty. 


xX 


Whether the Hindu religion was or was not a missionary religion has been a 
controversial issue. Some hold the view that it was never a missionary religion. Others 
hold that it was. That the Hindu religion was once a missionary religion must be 
admitted. It could not have spread over the face of India, if it was not a missionary 
religion. That today it is not a missionary religion is also a fact which must be accepted. 
The question therefore is not whether or not the Hindu religion was a missionary religion. 
The real question is why did the Hindu religion cease to be a missionary religion ? My 
answer is this. Hindu religion ceased to be a missionary religion when the Caste System 
grew up among the Hindus. Caste is inconsistent with conversion. Inculcation of beliefs 
and dogmas is not the only problem that is involved in conversion. To find a place for the 
convert in the social life of the community is another and a much more important 
problem that arises in connection with conversion. That problem is where to place the 
convert, in what caste ? It is a problem which must baffle every Hindu wishing to make 
aliens converts to his religion. Unlike the club the membership of a caste is not open to 
all and sundry. The law of caste confines its membership to person born in the caste. 
Castes are autonomous and there is no authority anywhere to compel a caste to admit a 
new-comer to its social life. Hindu Society being a collection of castes and each caste 
being a close corporation there is no place for a convert. Thus it is the caste which has 
prevented the Hindus from expanding and from absorbing other religious communities. 
So long as caste remain, Hindu religion cannot be made a missionary religion and Shudhi 
will be both a folly and a futility. 


XI 


The reasons which have made Shudhi impossible for Hindus are also responsible for 
making Sanghatan impossible. The idea underlying Sanghalan is to remove from the 
mind of the Hindu that timidity and cowardice which so painfully make him off from the 
Mohammedan and the Sikh and which have led him to adopt the low ways of treachery 
and cunning for protecting himself. The question naturally arises : From where does the

Sikh or the Mohammedan derive his strength which makes him brave and fearless ? Iam 
sure it is not due to relative superiority of physical strength, diet or drill. It is due to the 
strength arising out of the feeling that all Sikhs will come to the rescue of a Sikh when he 
is in danger and that all Mohammedans will rush to save a Muslim if he is attacked. The 
Hindu can derive no such strength. He cannot feel assured that his fellows will come to 
his help. Being one and fated to be alone he remains powerless, develops timidity and 
cowardice and in a fight surrenders or runs away. The Sikh as well as the Muslim stands 
fearless and gives battle because he knows that though one he will not be alone. The 
presence of this belief in the one helps him to hold out and the absence of it in the other 
makes him to give way. If you pursue this matter further and ask what is it that enables 
the Sikh and the Mohammedan to feel so assured and why is the Hindu filled with such 
despair in the matter of help and assistance you will find that the reasons for this 
difference lie in the difference in their associated mode of living. The associated mode of 
life practised by the Sikhs and the Mohammedans produces fellow-feeling. The 
associated mode of life of the Hindus does not. Among Sikhs and Muslims there is a 
social cement which makes them Bhais. Among Hindus there is no such cement and one 
Hindu does not regard another Hindu as his Bhai. This explains why a Sikh says and feels 
that one Sikh, or one Khalsa is equal to Sava Lakh men. This explains why one 
Mohammedan is equal to a crowd of Hindus. This difference is undoubtedly a difference 
due to caste. So long as caste remains, there will be no Sanghalan and so long as there is 
no Sanghatan the Hindu will remain weak and meek. The Hindus claim to be a very 
tolerant people. In my opinion this is a mistake. On many occasions they can be 
intolerant and if on some occasions they are tolerant that is because they are too weak to 
oppose or too indifferent to oppose. This indifference of the Hindus has become so much 
a part of their nature that a Hindu will quite meekly tolerate an insult as well as a wrong. 
You see amongst them, to use the words of Morris, " The great reading down the little, 
the strong beating down the weak, cruel men fearing not, kind men daring not and wise 
men caring not." With the Hindu Gods all forbearing, it is not difficult to imagine the 
pitiable condition of the wronged and the oppressed among the Hindus. Indifferentism is 
the worst kind of disease that can infect a people. Why is the Hindu so indifferent? In my 
opinion this indifferentism is the result of Caste System which has made Sanghatan and 
co-operation even for a good cause impossible. 


XI 


The assertion by the individual of his own opinions and beliefs, his own independence 
and interest as over against group standards, group authority and group interests is the 
beginning of all reform. But whether the reform will continue depends upon what scope 
the group affords for such individual assertion. If the group is tolerant and fair-minded in 
dealing with such individuals they will continue to assert and in the end succeed in 


converting their fellows. On the other hand if the group is intolerant and does not bother 
about the means it adopts to stifle such individuals they will perish and the reform will 
die out. Now a caste has an unquestioned right to excommunicate any man who is guilty 
of breaking the rules of the caste and when it is realized that excommunication involves a 
complete cesser of social intercourse it will be agreed that as a form of punishment there 
is really little to choose between excommunication and death. No wonder individual 
Hindus have not had the courage to assert their independence by breaking the barriers of 
caste. It is true that man cannot get on with his fellows. But it is also true that he cannot 
do without them. He would like to have the society of his fellows on his terms. If be 
cannot get it on his terms then he will be ready to have it on any terms even amounting to 
complete surrender. This is because he cannot do without society. A caste is ever ready to 
take advantage of the helplessness of a man and insist upon complete conformity to its 
code in letter and in spirit. A caste can easily organize itself into a conspiracy to make the 
life of a reformer a hell and if a conspiracy is a crime I do not understand why such a

nefarious act as an attempt to excommunicate a person for daring to act contrary to the 
rules of caste should not be made an offence punishable in law. But as it is, even law 
gives each caste an autonomy to regulate its membership and punish dissenters with 
excommunication. Caste in the hands of the orthodox has been a powerful weapon for 
persecuting the reforms and for killing all reform. 


XI 


The effect of caste on the ethics of the Hindus is simply deplorable. Caste has killed 
public spirit. Caste has destroyed the sense of public charity. Caste has made public 
opinion impossible. A Hindu's public is his caste. His responsibility is only to his caste. 
His loyalty is restricted only to his caste. Virtue has become caste-ridden and morality 
has become, caste-bound. There is no sympathy to the deserving. There is no appreciation 
of the meritorious. There is no charity to the needy. Suffering as such calls for no 
response. There is charity but it begins with the caste and ends with the caste. There is 
sympathy but not for men of other caste. Would a Hindu acknowledge and follow the 
leadership of a great and good man? The case of a Mahatma apart, the answer must be 
that he will follow a leader if he is a man of his caste. A Brahmin will follow a leader 
only if he is a Brahmin, a Kayastha if he is a Kayastha and so on. The capacity to 
appreciate merits in a man apart from his caste does not exist in a Hindu. There is 
appreciation of virtue but only when the man is a fellow caste-man. The whole morality 
is as bad as tribal morality. My caste-man, right or wrong; my caste-man, good or bad. It 
is not a case of standing by virtue and not standing by vice. It is a case of standing or not 
standing by the caste. Have not Hindus committed treason against their country in the 
interests of their caste? 


XIV 


I would not be surprised if some of you have grown weary listening to this tiresome 
tale of the sad effects which caste has produced. There is nothing new in it. I will 
therefore turn to the constructive side of the problem. What is your ideal society if you do 
not want caste is a question that is bound to be asked of you. If you ask me, my ideal 
would be a society based on Liberty, Equality and Fraternity. And why not ? What 
objection can there be to Fraternity ? I cannot imagine any. An ideal society should be 
mobile, should be full of channels for conveying a change taking place in one part to 
other parts. In an ideal society there should be many interests consciously communicated 
and shared. There should be varied and free points of contact with other modes of 
association. In other words there must be social endosmosis. This is fraternity, which is 
only another name for democracy. Democracy is not merely a form of Government. It is 
primarily a mode of associated living, of conjoint communicated experience. It is 
essentially an attitude of respect and reverence towards fellowmen. Any objection to 
Liberty ? Few object to liberty in the sense of a right to free movement, in the sense of a 
right to life and limb. There is no objection to liberty in the sense of a right to property, 
tools and materials as being necessary for earning a living to keep the body in due state of 
health. Why not allow liberty to benefit by an effective and competent use of a person's 
powers ? The supporters of caste who would allow liberty in the sense of a right to life, 
limb and property, would not readily consent to liberty in this sense, inasmuch as it 
involves liberty to choose one's profession. But to object to this kind of liberty is to 
perpetuate slavery. For slavery does not merely mean a legalized form of subjection. It 
means a state of society in which some men are forced to accept from other the purposes 
which control their conduct. This condition obtains even where there is no slavery in the 
legal sense. It is found where, as in the Caste System, some persons are compelled to 
carry on certain prescribed callings which are not of their choice. Any objection to 
equality ? This has obviously been the most contentious part of the slogan of the French 
Revolution. The objections to equality may be sound and one may have to admit that all 
men are not equal. But what of that ? Equality may be a fiction but nonetheless one must 
accept it as the governing principle. A. man's power is dependent upon (1) physical

heredity, (2) social inheritance or endowment in the form of parental care, education, 
accumulation of scientific knowledge, everything which enables him to be more efficient 
than the savage, and finally, (3) on his own efforts. In all these three respects men are 
undoubtedly unequal. But the question is, shall we treat them as unequal because they are 
unequal ? This is a question which the opponents of equality must answer. From the 
standpoint of the individualist it may be just to treat men unequally so far as their efforts 
are unequal. It may be desirable to give as much incentive as possible to the full 
development of every one's powers. But what would happen if men were treated 
unequally as they are, in the first two respects ? It is obvious that those individuals also in 


whose favour there is birth, education, family name, business connections and inherited 
wealth would be selected in the race. But selection under such circumstances would not 
be a selection of the able. It would be the selection of the privileged. The reason 
therefore, which forces that in the third respect we should treat men unequally demands 
that in the first two respects we should treat men as equally as possible. On the other hand 
it can be urged that if it is good for the social body to get the most out of its members, it 
can get most out of them only by making them equal as far as possible at the very start of 
the race. That is one reason why we cannot escape equality. But there is another reason 
why we must accept equality. A Statesman is concerned with vast numbers of people. He 
has neither the time nor the knowledge to draw fine distinctions and to treat each 
equitably i.e. according to need or according to capacity. However desirable or 
reasonable an equitable treatment of men may be, humanity is not capable of assortment 
and classification. The statesman, therefore, must follow some rough and ready rule and 
that rough and ready rule is to treat all men alike not because they are alike but because 
classification and assortment is impossible. The doctrine of equality is glaringly 
fallacious but taking all in all it is the only way a statesman can proceed in politics which 
is a severely practical affair and which demands a severely practical test. 


XV 


But there is a set of reformers who hold out a different ideal. They go by the name of 
the Arya Samajists and their ideal of social organization is what is called Chaturvarnya 
or the division of society into four classes instead of the four thousand castes that we 
have in India. To make it more attractive and to disarm opposition the protagonists of 
Chaturvarnya take great care to point out that their Chaturvarnya is based not on birth but 
on guna (worth). At the outset, I must confess that notwithstanding the worth-basis of 
this Chaturvarnya, it is an ideal to which I cannot reconcile myself. In the first place, if 
under the Chaturvarnya of the Arya Samajists an individual is to take his place in the 
Hindu Society according to his worth. I do not understand why the Arya Samajists insist 
upon labelling men as Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra. A learned man would be 
honoured without his being labelled a Brahmin. A soldier would be respected without his 
being designated a Kshatriya. If European society honours its soldiers and its servants 
without giving them permanent labels, why should Hindu Society find it difficult to do 
so is a question, which Arya Samajists have not cared to consider. There is another 
objection to the continuance of these labels. All reform consists in a change in the 
notions, sentiment and mental attitudes of the people towards men and things. It is 
common experience that certain names become associated with certain notions and 
sentiments, which determine a person's attitude towards men and things. The names, 
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra, are names which are associated with a definite 
and fixed notion in the mind of every Hindu. That notion is that of a hierarchy based on 


birth. So long as these names continue, Hindus will continue to think of the Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra as hierarchical divisions of high and low, based on birth, 
and act accordingly. The Hindu must be made to unlearn all this. But how can this 
happen if the old labels remain and continue to recall to his mind old notions. If new 
notions are to be inculcated in the minds of people it is necessary to give them new

names. To continue the old name is to make the reform futile. To allow this 
Chaturvarnya, based on worth to be designated by such stinking labels of Brahmin, 
Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, indicative of social divisions based on birth, is a snare. 


XVI 


To me this Chaturvarnya with its old labels is utterly repellent and my whole being 
rebels against it. But I do not wish to rest my objection to Chaturvarnya on mere grounds 
of sentiments. There are more solid grounds on which I rely for my opposition to it. A 
close examination of this ideal has convinced me that as a system of social organization, 
Chaturvarnya is impracticable, harmful and has turned out to be a miserable failure. From 
a practical point of view, the system of Chaturvarnya raises several difficulties which its 
protagonists do not seem to have taken into account. The principle underlying caste is 
fundamentally different from the principle underlying Varna. Not only are they 
fundamentally different but they are also fundamentally opposed. The former is based on 
worth . How are you going to compel people who have acquired a higher status based on 
birth without reference to their worth to vacate that status ? How are you going to compel 
people to recognize the status due to a man in accordance with his worth, who is 
occupying a lower status based on his birth ? For this you must first break up the caste 
System, in order to be able to establish the Varna system. How are you going to reduce 
the four thousand castes, based oil birth, to the four Varnas, based on worth ? This is the 
first difficulty which the protagonists of the Chaturvarnya must grapple with. There is a 
second difficulty which the protagonists of Chaturvarnya must grapple with, if they wish 
to make the establishment of Chaturvarnya a success. 


Chaturvarnya pre-supposes that you can classify people into four definite classes. Is 
this possible ? In this respect, the ideal of Chaturvarnya has, as you will see, a close 
affinity to the Platonic ideal. To Plato, men fell by nature into three classes. In some 
individuals, he believed mere appetites dominated. He assigned them to the labouring and 
trading classes. Others revealed to him that over and above appetites, they have a 
courageous disposition. He classed them as defenders in war and guardians of internal 
peace. Others showed a capacity to grasp the universal reason underlying things. He 
made them the law-givers of the people. The criticism to which Plato's Republic is 
subject, is also the criticism which must apply to the system of Chaturvarnya, in so far as 
it proceeds upon the possibility of an accurate classification of men into four distinct 


classes. The chief criticism against Plato is that his idea of lumping of individuals into a 
few sharply marked-off classes is a very superficial view of man and his powers. Plato 
had no perception of the uniqueness of every individual, of his incommensurability with 
others, of each individual forming a class of his own. He had no recognition of the 
infinite diversity of active tendencies and combination of tendencies of which an 
individual is capable. To him, there were types of faculties or powers in the individual 
constitution. All this is demonstrably wrong. Modem science has shown that lumping 
together of individuals into a few sharply marked-off classes is a superficial view of man 
not worthy of serious consideration. Consequently, the utilization of the qualities of 
individuals is incompatible with their stratification by classes, since the qualities of 
individuals are so variable. Chaturvarnya must fail for the very reason for which Plato's 
Republic must fail, namely that it is not possible to pigeon men into holes, according as 
he belongs to one class or the other. That it is impossible to accurately classify people 
into four definite classes is proved by the fact that the original four classes have now 
become four thousand castes. 


There is a third difficulty in the way of the establishment of the system of 
Chaturvarnya. How are you going to maintain the system of Chaturvarnya, supposing it 
was established ? One important requirement for the successful working of Chaturvarnya 
is the maintenance of the penal system which could maintain it by its sanction. The 
system of Chaturvarnya must perpetually face the problem of the transgressor. Unless 
there is a penalty attached to the act of transgression, men will not keep to their

respective classes. The whole system will break down, being contrary to human nature. 
Chaturvarnya cannot subsist by its own inherent goodness. It must be enforced by law. 


That, without penal sanction the ideal of Chaturvarnya cannot be realized, is proved by 
the story in the Ramayana of Rama killing Shambuka. Some people seem to blame Rama 
because he wantonly and without reason killed Shambuka. But to blame Rama for killing 
Shambuka is to misunderstand the whole situation. Ram Raj was a Raj based on 
Chaturvarnya. As a king, Rama was bound to maintain Chaturvarnya. It was his duty 
therefore to kill Shambuka, the Shudra, who had transgressed his class and wanted to be a 
Brahmin. This is the reason why Rama killed Shambuka. But this also shows that penal 
sanction is necessary for the maintenance of Chaturvarnya. Not only penal sanction is 
necessary, but penalty of death is necessary. That is why Rama did not inflict on 
Shambuka a lesser punishment. That is why Manu-Smriti prescribes such heavy 
sentences as cutting off the tongue or pouring of molten lead in the ears of the Shudra, 
who recites or hears the Veda. The supporters of Chaturvarnya must give an assurance 
that they could successfully classify men and they could induce modern society in the 
twentieth century to reforge the penal sanctions of Manu-Smriti. 


The protagonists of Chaturvarnya do not seem to have considered what is to happen to 
women in their system. Are they also to be divided into four classes, Brahmin, Kshatriya, 
Vaishya and Shudra? Or are they to be allowed to take the status of their husbands. If the 
status of the woman is to be the consequence of marriage what becomes of the underlying 
principle of Chaturvarnya, namely, that the status of a person should be based upon the 
worth of that person ? If they are to be classified according to their worth is their 
classification to be nominal or real ? If it is to be nominal then it is useless and then the 
protagonists of Chaturvarnya must admit that their system does not apply to women. If it 
is real, are the protagonists of Chaturvarnya prepared to follow the logical consequences 
of applying it to women ? They must be prepared to have women priests and women 
soldiers. Hindu society has grown accustomed to women teachers and women barristers. 
It may grow accustomed to women brewers and women butchers. But he would be a bold 
person, who would say that it will allow women priests and women soldiers. But that will 
be the logical outcome of applying Chaturvarnya to women. Given these difficulties, I 
think no one except a congenital idiot could hope and believe in a successful regeneration 
of the Chaturvarnya. 


XVII 


Assuming that Chaturvarnya is practicable, I contend that it is the most vicious system. 
That the Brahmins should cultivate knowledge, that the Kshatriya should bear arms, that 
the Vaishya. should trade and that the Shudra should serve sounds as though it was a 
system of division of labour. Whether the theory was intended to state that the Shudra 
need not or that whether it was intended to lay down that he must not, is an interesting 
question. The defenders of Chaturvarnya give it the first meaning. They say, why should 
the Shudra need trouble to acquire wealth, when the three Vamas are there to support him 
? Why need the Shudra bother to take to education, when there is the Brahmin to whom 
he can go when the occasion for reading or writing arises ? Why need the Shudra worry 
to arm himself because there is the Kshatriya to protect him ? The theory of 
Chaturvarnya, understood in this sense, may be said to look upon the Shudra as the ward 
and the three Vamas as his guardians. Thus interpreted, it is a simple, elevating and 
alluring theory. Assuming this to be the correct view of the underlying conception of 
Chaturvarnya, it seems to me that the system is neither fool-proof nor knave-proof. What 
is to happen, if the Brahmins, Vaishyas and Kshatriyas fail to pursue knowledge, to 
engage in economic enterprise and to be efficient soldiers which are their respective 
functions ? Contrary-wise, suppose that they discharge their functions but flout their duty 
to the Shudra or to one another, what is to happen to the Shudra if the three classes refuse 
to support him on fair terms or combine to keep him down ? Who is to safeguard the 
interests of the Shudra or for the matter of that of the Vaishya and Kshatriya when the

person, who is trying to take advantage of his ignorance is the Brahmin? Who is to 


defend the liberty of the Shudra and for the matter of that, of the Brahmin and the 
Vaishya when the person who is robbing him of it is the Kshatriya ? Inter-dependence of 
one class on another class is inevitable. Even dependence of one class upon another may 
sometimes become allowable. But why make one person depend upon another in the 
matter of his vital needs ? Education everyone must have. Means of defence everyone 
must have. These are the paramount requirements of every man for his self-preservation. 
How can the fact that his neighbour is educated and armed help a man who is uneducated 
and disarmed. The whole theory is absurd. These are the questions, which the defenders 
of Chaturvarnya do not seem to be troubled about. But they are very pertinent questions. 
Assuming their conception of Chaturvarnya that the relationship between the different 
classes is that of ward and guardian is the real conception underlying Chaturvarnya, it 
must be admitted that it makes no provision to safeguard the interests of the ward from 
the misdeeds of the guardian. Whether the relationship of guardian and ward was the real 
underlying conception, on which Chaturvarnya was based, there is no doubt that in 
practice the relation was that of master and servants. The three classes, Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas although not very happy in their mutual relationship managed to 
work by compromise. The Brahmin flattered the Kshatriya and both let the Vaishya live 
in order to be able to live upon him. But the three agreed to beat down the Shudra. He 
was not allowed to acquire wealth lest he should be independent of the three Varncus. He 
was prohibited from acquiring knowledge lest he should keep a steady vigil regarding his 
interests. He was prohibited from bearing arms lest he should have the means to rebel 
against their authority. That this is how the Shudras were treated by the Tryavarnikas is 
evidenced by the Laws of Manu. There is no code of laws more infamous regarding 
social rights than the Laws of Manu. Any instance from anywhere of social injustice must 
pale before it. Why have the mass of people tolerated the social evils to which they have 
been subjected? There have been social revolutions in other countries of the world. Why 
have there not been social revolutions in India is a question which has incessantly 
troubled me. There is only one answer, which I can give and it is that the lower classes of 
Hindus have been completely disabled for direct action on account of this wretched 
system of Chaturvarnya. They could not bear arms and without arms they could not rebel. 
They were all ploughmen or rather condemned to be ploughmen and they never were 
allowed to convert their ploughshare into swords. They had no bayonets and therefore 
everyone who chose could and did sit upon them. On account of the Chaturvarnya, they 
could receive no education. They could not think out or know the way to their salvation. 
They were condemned to be lowly and not knowing the way of escape and not having the 
means of escape, they became reconciled to eternal servitude, which they accepted as 
their inescapable fate. It is true that even in Europe the strong has not shrunk from the 
exploitation, nay the spoliation of the weak. But in Europe, the strong have never 
contrived to make the weak helpless against exploitation so shamelessly as was the case 
in India among the Hindus. Social war has been raging between the strong and the weak 


far more violently in Europe than it has ever been in India. Yet, the weak in Europe has 
had in his freedom of military service his physical weapon, in suffering his political 
weapon and in education his moral weapon. These three weapons for emancipation were 
never withheld by the strong from the weak in Europe. All these weapons were, however, 
denied to the masses in India by Chaturvarnya. There cannot be a more degrading system 
of social organization than the Chaturvarnya. It is the system which deadens, paralyses 
and cripples the people from helpful activity. This is no exaggeration. History bears 
ample evidence. There is only one period in Indian history which is a period of freedom, 
greatness and glory. That is the period of the Mourya Empire. At all other times the 
country suffered from defeat and darkness. But the Mourya period was a period when

Chaturvarnya was completely annihilated, when the Shudras, who constituted the mass of 
the people, came into their own and became the rulers of the country. The period of 
defeat and darkness is the period when Chaturvarnya flourished to the damnation of the 
greater part of the people of the country. 


XVUI 


Chaturvarnya is not new. It is as old as the Vedas. That is one of the reasons why we 
are asked by the Arya Samajists to consider its claims. Judging from the past as a system 
of social organization, it has been tried and it has failed. How many times have the 
Brahmins annihilated the seed of the Kshatriyas! How many times have the Kshatriyas 
annihilated the Brahmins! The Mahabharata and the Puranas are full of incidents of the 
strife between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. They even quarreled over such petty 
questions as to who should salute first, as to who should give way first, the Brahmins or 
the Kshatriyas, when the two met in the street. Not only was the Brahmin an eyesore to 
die Kshatriya and the Kshatriya an eyesore to the Brahmin, it seems that the Kshatriyas 
had become tyrannical and the masses, disarmed as they were under the system of 
Chaturvarnya, were praying Almighty God for relief from their tyranny. The Bhagwat 
tells us very definitely that Krishna had taken Avtar for one sacred purpose and that was 
to annihilate the Kshatriyas. With these instances of rivalry and enmity between the 
different Vurnas before us, I do not understand how any one can hold out Chaturvarnya 
as an ideal to be aimed at or as a pattern, on which the Hindu Society should be 
remodelled. 


XIX 


I have dealt with those, who are without you and whose hostility to your ideal is quite 
open. There appear to be others, who are neither without you nor with you. I was 
hesitating whether I should deal with their point of view. But on further consideration I 
have come to the conclusion that I must and that for two reasons. Firstly, their attitude to 
the problem of caste is not merely an attitude of neutrality, but is an attitude of aimed 


neutrality. Secondly, they probably represent a considerable body of people. Of these, 
there is one set which finds nothing peculiar nor odious in the Caste System of the 
Hindus. Such Hindus cite the case of Muslims, Sikhs and Christians and find comfort in 
the fact that they too have castes amongst them. In considering this question you must a.t 
the outset bear in mind that nowhere is human society one single whole. It is always 
plural. In the world of action, the individual is one limit and society the other. Between 
them lie all sorts of associative arrangements of lesser and larger scope, families, 
friendship, co-operative associations, business combines, political parties, bands of 
thieves and robbers. These small groups are usually firmly welded together and are often 
as exclusive as castes. They have a narrow and intensive code, which is often anti-social. 
This is true of every society, in Europe as well as in Asia, The question to be asked in 
determining whether a given society is an ideal society ; is not whether there are groups 
in it, because groups exist in all societies. The. questions to be asked in determining what 
is an ideal society are : How numerous and varied are the interests which are consciously 
shared by the groups ? How full and free is the interplay with other forms of associations 
? Are the forces that separate groups and classes more numerous than the forces that unite 
? What social significance is attached to this group life ? Is its exclusiveness a matter of 
custom and convenience or is it a matter of religion ? It is in the light of these questions 
that one must decide whether caste among Non-Hindus is the same as caste among 
Hindus. If we apply these considerations to castes among Mohammedans, Sikhs and 
Christians on the one hand and to castes among Hindus on the other, you will find that 
caste among Non-Hindus is fundamentally different from caste among Hindus. First, the 
ties, which consciously make the Hindus hold together, are non-existent, while among 
Non-Hindus there are many that hold them together. The strength of a society depends 
upon the presence of points of contact, possibilities of interaction between different 
groups which exist in it. These are what Carlyle calls " organic filaments " i.e. the elastic 
threads which help to bring the disintegrating elements together and to reunite them.

There is no integrating farce among the Hindus to counteract the disintegration caused by 
caste. While among the Non-Hindus there are plenty of these organic filaments which 
bind them together. Again it must be borne in mind that although there are castes among 
Non-Hindus, as there are among Hindus, caste has not the same social significance for 
Non-Hindus as it has for Hindus. Ask Mohammedan or a Sikh, who he is? He tells you 
that he is a Mohammedan or a Sikh as the case may be. He does not tell you his caste 
although he has one and you are satisfied with his answer. When he tells you that he is a 
Muslim, you do not proceed to ask him whether he is a Shiya or a Suni; Sheikh or Saiyad 
; Khatik or Pinjari. When he tells you he is a Sikh, you do not ask him whether he is Jat 
or Roda ; Mazbi or Ramdasi. But you are not satisfied, if a person tells you that he is a 
Hindu. You feel bound to inquire into his caste. Why ? Because so essential is caste in 
the case of a Hindu that without knowing it you do not feel sure what sort of a being he 
is. That caste has not the same social significance among Non-Hindus as it has among 


Hindus is clear if you take into consideration the consequences which follow breach of 
caste. There may be castes among Sikhs and Mohammedans but the Sikhs and the 
Mohammedans will not outcast a Sikh or a Mohammedan if he broke his caste. Indeed, 
the very idea of excommunication is foreign to the Sikhs and the Mohammedans. But 
with the Hindus the case is entirely different. He is sure to be outcasted if he broke caste. 
This shows the difference in the social significance of caste to Hindus and Non-Hindus. 
This is the second point of difference. But there is also a third and a more important one. 
Caste among the non-Hindus has no religious consecration; but among the Hindus most 
decidedly it has. Among the Non-Hindus, caste is only a practice, not a sacred institution. 
They did not originate it. With them it is only a survival. They do not regard caste as a 
religious dogma. Religion compels the Hindus to treat isolation and segregation of castes 
as a virtue. Religion does not compel the Non-Hindus to take the same attitude towards 
caste. If Hindus wish to break caste, their religion will come in their way. But it will not 
be so in the case of Non-Hindus. It is, therefore, a dangerous delusion to take comfort in 
the mere existence of caste among Non-Hindus, without caring to know what place caste 
occupies in their life and whether there are other " organic filaments ", which subordinate 
the feeling of caste to the feeling of community. The sooner the Hindus are cured of this 
delusion the butter. 


The other set denies that caste presents any problem at all for the .Hindus 


to consider. Such Hindus seek comfort in the view that the Hindus have survived and take 
this as a proof of their fitness to survive. This point of view is well expressed by Prof. S. 
Radhakrishnan in his Hindu view of life. Referring to Hinduism he says, " The 
civilization itself has not, been a short-lived one. its historic records date back for over 
four thousand years and even then it had reached a stage of civilization which has 
continued its unbroken, though at times slow and static, course until the present day. It 
has stood the stress and strain of more than four or five millenniums of spiritual thought 
and experience. Though peoples of different races and cultures have been pouring into 
India from the dawn of History, Hinduism has been able to maintain its supremacy and 
even the proselytising creeds backed by political power have not been able to coerce the 
large majority of Hindus to their views. The Hindu culture possesses some vitality which 
seems to be denied to some other more forceful current . It is no more necessary to 
dissect Hinduism than to open a tree to see whether the sap still runs." The name of Prof. 
Radhakrishnan is big enough to invest with profundity whatever he says and impress the 
minds of his readers. But I must not hesitate to speak out my mind. For, I fear that his 
statement may become the basis of a vicious argument that the fact of survival is proof of 
fitness to survive. It seems to me that the question is. not whether a community lives or 
dies ; the question is on what plane does it live. There are different modes of survival. 
But all are not equally honourable. For an individual as well as for a society, there is a

gulf between merely living and living worthily. To fight in a battle and to live in glory is 
one mode. To beat a retreat, to surrender and to live the life of a captive is. also a mode of 
survival. It is useless for a Hindu to take comfort in the fact that he and his people have 
survived. What he must consider is what is the quality of their survival. If he does that, I 
am sure he will cease to take pride in the mere fact of survival. A Hindu's life has been a 
life of continuous defeat and what appears to him to be life everlasting is not living 
everlastingly but is really a life which is perishing everlastingly. It is a mode of survival 
of which every right-minded Hindu, who is not afraid to own up the truth, will feel 
ashamed. 


XX 


There is no doubt; in my opinion, that unless you change your social order you can 
achieve little by way of progress. You cannot mobilize the community either for 
defence or for offence. You cannot build anything on the foundations of caste. You 
cannot build up a nation, you cannot build up a morality. Anything that you will build on 
the foundations of caste will crack and will never be a whole. 


The only question that remains to be considered is—How to bring about the reform of 
the Hindu social order ? How to abolish caste ? This is a question of supreme 
importance. There is a view that in the refarm of caste, the first step to take, is to abolish 
sub-castes. This view is based upon the supposition that there is a greater similarity in 
manners and status between sub-caste than there is between castes. I think, this is an 
erroneous supposition. The Brahmins of Northem and Central India are socially of lower 
grade, as compared with the Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern India. The former are 
only cooks and water-carriers while the latter occupy a high social position. On the other 
hand, in Northern India, the Vaishyas and Kayasthas are intellectually and socially on a 
par with the Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern India. Again, in the matter of food 
there is no similarity between the Brahmins of the Deccan and Southern India, who are 
vegetarians and the Brahmins of Kashmir and Bengal who are non-vegetarians. On the 
other hand, the Brahmins of the- Deccan and Southern India have more in common so far 
as food is concerned with such non-Brahmins as the Gujaratis, Marwaris, Banias and 
Jains. There is no doubt that from the standpoint of making the transit from one caste to 
another easy, the fusion of the Kayasthas of Northern India and the other Non-Brahmins 
of Southern India with the Non-Brahmins of the Deccan and the Dravid country is more 
practicable than the fusion of the Brahmins of the South with the Brahmins of the North. 
But assuming that the fusion of sub-Castes is possible, what guarantee is there that the 
abolition of sub-Castes will necessarily lead to the abolition of Castes ? On the contrary, 
it may happen that the process may stop with the abolition of sub-Castes. In that case, the 
abolition of sub-Castes will only help to strengthen the Castes and make them more 


powerful and therefore more mischievous. This remedy is therefore neither practicable 
nor effective and may easily prove to be a wrong remedy. Another plan of action for the 
abolition of Caste is to begin with inter-caste dinners. This also, in my opinion, is an 
inadequate remedy. There are many Castes which allow inter-dining. But it is a common 
experience that inter-dining has not succeeded in killing the spirit of Caste and the 
consciousness of Caste. I am convinced that the real remedy is inter-marriage. Fusion of 
blood can alone create the feeling of being kith and kin and unless this feeling of kinship, 
of being kindred, becomes paramount the separatist feeling—the feeling of being 
aliens—created by Caste will not vanish. Among the Hindus inter-marriage must 
necessarily be a factor of greater force in social life than it need be in the life of the non- 
Hindus. Where society is already well-knit by other ties, marriage is an ordinary incident 
of life. But where society cut asunder, marriage as a binding force becomes a matter of 
urgent necessity. The real remedy for breaking Caste is inter-marriage. Nothing else will 
serve as the solvent of Caste. Your Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal has adopted this line of attack. 


It is a direct and frontal attack, and I congratulate you upon a collect diagnosis and

more upon your having shown the courage to tell the Hindus what is really wrong with 
them. Political tyranny is nothing compared to social tyranny and a reformer, who defies 
society, is a much more courageous man than a politician, who defies Government. You 
are right in holding that Caste will cease to be an operative farce only when inter-dining 
and inter-marriage have become matters of common course. You have located the source 
of the disease. But is your prescription the right prescription for the disease ? Ask 
yourselves this question ; Why is it that a large majority of Hindus do not inter-dine and 
do not inter-marry ? Why is it that your cause is not popular ? There can be only one 
answer to this question and it is that inter-dining and inter-marriage are repugnant to the 
beliefs and dogmas which the Hindus regard as sacred. Caste is not a physical object like 
a wall of bricks or a line of barbed wire which prevents the Hindus from co-mingling and 
which has, therefore, to be pulled down. Caste is a notion, it is a state of the mind. The 
destruction of Caste does not therefore mean the destruction of a physical barrier. It 
means a notional change. Caste may be bad. Caste may lead to conduct so gross as to be 
called man's inhumanity to man. All the same, it must be recognized that the Hindus 
observe Caste not because they are inhuman or wrong headed. They observe Caste 
because they are deeply religious. People are not wrong in observing Caste. In my view, 
what is wrong is their religion, which has inculcated this notion of Caste. If this is 
correct, then obviously the enemy, you must grapple with, is not the people who observe 
Caste, but the Shastras which teach them this religion of Caste. Criticising and ridiculing 
people for not inter-dining or inter-marrying or occasionally holding inter-caste dinners 
and celebrating inter-caste marriages, is a futile method of achieving the desired end. The 
real remedy is to destroy the belief in the sanctity of the Shastras. How do you expect to 
succeed, if you allow the Shastras to continue to mould the beliefs and opinions of the 


people ? Not to question the authority of the Shastras , to permit the people to believe in 
their sanctity and their sanctions and to blame them and to criticise them for their acts as 
being irrational and inhuman is a incongruous way of carrying on social reform. 
Reformers working for the removal of untouchability including Mahatma Gandhi, do not 
seem to realize that the acts of the people are merely the results of their beliefs inculcated 
upon their minds by the Shastras and that people will not change their conduct until they 
cease to believe in the sanctity of the Shastras on which their conduct is founded. No 
wonder that such efforts have not produced any results. You also seem to be erring in the 
same way as the reformers working in the cause of removing untouchability. To agitate 
for and to organise inter-caste dinners and inter-caste marriages is like forced feeding 
brought about by artificial means. Make every man and woman free from the thraldom of 
the Shastras , cleanse their minds of the pernicious notions founded on the Shastras, and 
he or she will inter-dine and inter-marry, without your telling him or her to do so. 


It is no use seeking refuge in quibbles. It is no use telling people that the Shastras do 
not say what they are believed to say, grammatically read or logically interpreted. What 
matters is how the Shastras have been understood by the people. You must take the stand 
that Buddha took. You must take the stand which Guru Nanak took. You must not only 
discard the Shastras, you must deny their authority, as did Buddha and Nanak. You must 
have courage to tell the Hindus, that what is wrong with them is their religion— the 
religion which has produced in them this notion of the sacredness of Caste. Will you 
show that courage ? 


XXI 


What are your chances of success ? Social reforms fall into different species. There is a 
species of reform, which does not relate to the religious notion of people but is purely 
secular in character. There is also a species of reform, which relates to the religious 
notions of people. Of such a species of reform, there are two varieties. In one, the reform 
accords with the principles of the religion and merely invites people, who have departed 
from it, to revert to them and to follow them. The second is a reform which not only

touches the religious principles but is diametrically opposed to those principles and 
invites people to depart from and to discard their authority and to act contrary to those 
principles. Caste is the natural outcome of certain religious beliefs which have the 
sanction of the Shastras, which are believed to contain the command of divinely inspired 
sages who were endowed with a supernatural wisdom and whose commands, therefore, 
cannot be disobeyed without committing sin. The destruction of Caste is a reform which 
falls under the third category. To ask people to give up Caste is to ask them to go 
contrary to their fundamental religious notions. It is obvious that the first and second 
species of reform are easy. But the third is a stupendous task, well nigh impossible. The 


Hindus hold to the sacredness of the social order. Caste has a divine basis. You must 
therefore destroy the sacredness and divinity with which Caste has become invested. In 
the last analysis, this means you must destroy the authority of the Shastras and the Vedas. 


I have emphasized this question of the ways and means of destroying Caste, because I 
think that knowing the proper ways and means is more important than knowing the ideal. 
If you do not know the real ways and means, all your shots are sure to be misfires. If my 
analysis is correct then your task is herculean. You alone can say whether you are capable 
of achieving it. 


Speaking for myself, I see the task to be well nigh impossible. Perhaps you would like 
to know why I think so. Out of the many reasons, which have led me to take this view, I 
will mention some, which I regard much important. One of these reasons is the attitude of 
hostility, which the Brahmins have shown towards this question. The Brahmins form the 
vanguard of the movement for political reform and in some cases also of economic 
reform. But they are not to be found even as camp followers in the army raised to break 
down the barricades of Caste. Is there any hope of the Brahmins ever taking up a lead in 
the future in this matter? I say no. You may ask why ? You may argue that there is no 
reason why Brahmins should continue to shun social reform. You may argue that the 
Brahmins know that the bane of Hindu Society is Caste and as an enlightened class could 
not be expected to be indifferent to its consequences. You may argue that there are 
secular Brahmins and priestly Brahmins and if the latter do not take up the cudgels on 
behalf of those who want to break Caste, the former will. All this of course sounds very 
plausible. But in all this it is forgotten that the break up of the Caste system is bound to 
affect adversely the Brahmin Caste. Having regard to this, is it reasonable to expect that 
the Brahmins will ever consent to lead a movement the ultimate result of which is to 
destroy the power and prestige of the Brahmin Caste ? Is it reasonable to expect the 
secular Brahmins to take part in a movement directed against the priestly Brahmins ? In 
my judgment, it is useless to make a distinction between the secular Brahmins and 
priestly Brahmins. Both are kith and kin. They are two arms of the same body and one 
bound to fight for the existence of the other. In this connection, I am reminded of some 
very pregnant remarks made by Prof. Dicey in his English Constitution. Speaking of the 
actual limitation on the legislative supremacy of Parliament, Dicey says : " The actual 
exercise of authority by any sovereign whatever, and notably by Parliament, is bounded 
or controlled by two limitations. Of these the one is an external, and the other is an 
internal limitation. The external limit to the real power of a sovereign consists in the 
possibility or certainty that his subjects or a large number of them will disobey or resist 
his laws. . . The internal limit to the exercise of sovereignty arises from the nature of the 
sovereign power itself. Even a despot exercises his powers in accordance with his 
character, which is itself moulded by the circumstance under which he lives, including 


under that head the moral feelings of the time and the society to which he belongs. The 
Sultan could not, if he would, change the religion of the Mohammedan world, but even if 
he could do so, it is in the very highest degree improbable that the head of 
Mohammedanism should wish to overthrow the religion of Mohammed ; the internal

check on the exercise of the Sultan's power is at least as strong as the external limitation. 
People sometimes ask the idle question, why the Pope does not introduce this or that 
reform? The true answer is that a revolutionist is not the kind of man who becomes a 
Pope and that a man who becomes a Pope has no wish to be a revolutionist." I think, 
these remarks apply equally to the Brahmins of India and one can say with equal truth 
that if a man who becomes a Pope has no wish to become a revolutionary, a man who is 
born a Brahmin has much less desire to become a revolutionary. Indeed, to expect a 
Brahmin to be a revolutionary in matters of social reform is as idle as to expect the 
British Parliament, as was said by Leslie Stephen, to pass an Act requiring all blue-eyed 
babies to be murdered. 


Some of you will say that it is a matter of small concern whether the Brahmins come 
forward to lead the movement against Caste or whether they do not. To take this view is 
in my judgment to ignore the part played by the intellectual class in the community. 
Whether you accept the theory of the great man as the maker of history or whether you 
do not, this much you will have to concede that in every country the intellectual class is 
the most influential class, if not the governing class. The intellectual class is the class 
which can foresee, it is the class which can advise and give lead. In no country does the 
mass of the people live the life of intelligent thought and action. It is largely imitative and 
follows the intellectual class. There is no exaggeration in saying that the entire destiny of 
a country depends upon its intellectual class. If the intellectual class is honest, 
independent and disinterested it can be trusted to take the initiative and give a proper lead 
when a crisis arises. It is true that intellect by itself is no virtue. It is only a means and the 
use of means depends upon the ends which an intellectual person pursues. An intellectual 
man can be a good man but he can easily be a rogue. Similarly an intellectual class may 
be a band of high-souled persons, ready to help, ready to emancipate erring humanity or 
it may easily be a gang of crooks or a body of advocates of a narrow clique from which it 
draws its support. You may think it a pity that the intellectual class in India is simply 
another name for the Brahmin caste. You may regret that the two are one.; that the 
existence of the intellectual class should be bound with one single caste, that this 
intellectual class should share the interest and the aspirations of that Brahmin caste, 
which has regarded itself the custodian of the interest of that caste, rather than of the 
interests of the country. All this may be very regrettable. But the fact remains, that the 
Brahmins form the intellectual class of the Hindus. It is not only an intellectual class but 
it is a class which is held in great reverence by the rest of the Hindus. The Hindus are 
taught that the Brahmins are Bhudevas (Gods on earth) vernanam brahmnam guruh ! : 


The Hindus are taught that Brahmins alone can be their teachers. Manu says, "If it be 
asked how it should be with respect to points of the Dharma which have not been 
specially mentioned, the answer is that which Brahmins who are Shishthas propound 
shall doubtless have legal force." : 


ANAMNATESHU DHARMERU KATHAM SYADITI CHEDBHVETA ! 
YAM SHISHTA BRAHNAM BRUYUH SA DHARMAH SYADASHNKITAH !! 


When such an intellectual class, which holds the rest of the community in its grip, is 
opposed to the reform of Caste, the chances of success in a movement for the break-up of 
the Caste system appear to me very, very remote. 


The second reason, why I say the task is impossible, will be clear if you will bear in 
mind that the Caste system has two aspects. In one of its aspects, it divides men into 
separate communities. In its second aspect, it places these communities in a graded order 
one above the other in social status. Each caste takes its pride and its consolation in the 
fact that in the scale of castes it is above some other caste. As an outward mark of this 
gradation, there is also a gradation of social and religious rights technically spoken of an 
Ashta-dhikaras and Sanskaras. The higher the grade of a caste, the greater the number of 
these rights and the lower the grade, the lesser their number. Now this gradation, this

scaling of castes, makes it impossible to organise a common front against the Caste 
System. If a caste claims the right to inter-dine and inter-marry with another caste placed 
above it, it is frozen, instantly it is told by mischief-mongers, and there are many 
Brahmins amongst such mischief-mongers, that it will have to concede inter-dining and 
inter-marriage with castes below it ! All are slaves of the Caste System. But all the slaves 
are not equal in status. To excite the proletariat to bring about an economic revolution, 
Karl Marx told them : " You have nothing to lose except your chains." But the artful way 
in which the social and religious rights are distributed among the different castes whereby 
some have more and some have less, makes the slogan of Karl Marx quite useless to 
excite the Hindus against the Caste System. Castes form a graded system of 
sovereignties, high and low, which are jealous of their status and which know that if a 
general dissolution came, some of them stand to lose more of their prestige and power 
than others do. You cannot, therefore, have a general mobilization of the Hindus, to use a 
military expression, for an attack on the Caste System. 


XXII 


Can you appeal to reason and ask the Hindus to discard Caste as being contrary to 
reason ? That raises the question : Is a Hindu free to follow his reason? Manu has laid 
down three sanctions to which every Hindu must conform in the matter of his behaviour 


vedah smritih sadacharah uvasy cha priyamatmanah Here there is no place for reason to 
play its part. A Hindu must follow either Veda, Smriti or Sadachar. He cannot follow 
anything else. In the first place how are the texts of the Vedas and Smritis to be 
interpreted whenever any doubt arises regarding their meaning ? On this important 
question the view of Manu is quite definite. He says : 


yovamanyet te moole hetushrashraya dwizah 
sa sadhubhirbahishkaryo nashtiko vedandikah 


According to this rule, rationalism as a canon of interpreting the Vedas and Smritis, 
is absolutely condemned. It is regarded to be as wicked as atheism and the punishment 
provided for it is ex-communication. Thus, where a matter is covered by the Veda or the 
Smriti, a Hindu cannot resort to rational thinking. Even when there is a conflict between 
Vedas and Smritis on matters on which they have given a positive injunction, the solution 
is not left to reason. When there is a conflict between two Shrutis, both are to be regarded 
as of equal authority. Either of them may be followed. No attempt is to be made to find 
out which of the two accords with reason. This is made clear by Manu: 


shrutidwadham tu yatra syaptatra dharvarvudhau smritau 


"When there is a conflict between Shruti and Sinriti , the Shruti must prevail." But here 
too, no attempt must be made to find out which of the two accords with reason. This is 
laid down by Manu in the following Shloka : 


ya vedabahyah snrityo yashch kashch kridrishtah i 
sarvasta nishphalah prety tamonishtha hi tah smritah ti 


Again, when there is a conflict between two Smritis, the Manu-Smriti must prevail, but 
no attempt is to be made to find out which of the two accords with reason. This is the 
ruling given by Brihaspati: 


vedayatvopanibandhritavat pramanyam hi manoah smritah 
manvrthaviparita tu ya smritih sa na shashyate 


It is, therefore, clear that in any matter on which the Shrutis and Smritis have given a 
positive direction, a Hindu is not free to use his reasoning faculty. The same rule is laid 
down in the Mahabharat : 


puranam manvo dharmah sango vedashchikitsitam 


agasidhani chatvari na hantavyani hetubhih 


He must abide by their directions. The Caste and Varna are matters, which are dealt 
with by the Vedas and the Smritis and consequently, appeal to reason can have no effect 
on a Hindu. So far as Caste and Varna are concerned, not only the Shastras do not permit 
the Hindu to use his reason in the decision of the question, but they have taken care to see 
that no occasion is left to examine in a rational way the foundations of his belief in Caste 
and Varna. It must be a source of silent amusement to many a Non-Hindu to find 
hundreds and thousands of Hindus breaking Caste on certain occasions, such as railway 
journey and foreign travel and yet endeavouring to maintain Caste for the rest of their 
lives ! The explanation of this phenomenon discloses another fetter on the reasoning

faculties of the Hindus. Man's life is generally habitual and unreflective. Reflective 
thought, in the sense of active, persistent and careful consideration of any belief or 
supposed form or knowledge in the light of the grounds that support it and further 
conclusions to which it tends, is quite rare and arises only in a situation which presents a 
dilemma—a Crisis-Railway journeys and foreign travels are really occasions of crisis in 
the life of a Hindu and it is natural to expect a Hindu to ask himself why he should 
maintain Caste at all, if he cannot maintain it at all times. But he does not. He breaks 
Caste at one step and proceeds to observe it at the next without raising any question. The 
reason for this astonishing conduct is to be found in the rule of the Shastras, which 
directs him to maintain Caste as far as possible and to undergo praynschitia when he 
cannot. By this theory of prayaschitta , the Shastras by following a spirit of compromise 
have given caste a perpetual lease of life and have smothered reflective thought which 
would have otherwise led to the destruction of the notion of Caste. 


There have been many who have worked in the cause of the abolition of Caste and 
Untouchability. Of those, who can be mentioned, Ramanuja, Kabir and others stand out 
prominently. Can you appeal to the acts of these reformers and exhort the Hindus to 
follow them ? It is true that Manu has included Sadachar (sadachar) as one of the 
sanctions along with Shruti and Smriti. Indeed, Sadachar has been given a higher place 
than Shastras : 


yaddwacharyate yen dharmya vadharmamev va 
deshasyacharanam nityam charitram tadwikirtatam 


according to this, sadachar, whether, it is dharmya or adharmya in accordance with 
Shastras or contrary to Shastras, must be followed. But what is the meaning of Sadachar 
? If any one were to suppose that Sadachar means right or good acts i.e. acts of good and 
righteous men he would find himself greatly mistaken. Sadachar does not means good 


acts or acts of good men. It means ancient custom good or bad. The following verse 
makes this clear : 


yasmin deshe ya acharah parmpayakramagatah 
varnani kil sarvesham sa sadachar uchyate 


As though to warn people against the view that Sadachar means good acts or acts of 
good men and fearing that people might understand it that way and follow the acts of 
good men, the Smrities have commanded the Hindus in unmistakable terms not to follow 
even Gods in their good deeds, if they are contrary to Shruti, Smrili and Sadachar. This 
may sound to be most extraordinary, most perverse, but the. fact remains that na 
devacharitam charet is an injunction, issued to the Hindus by their Shastras. Reason and 
morality are the two most powerful weapons in the armoury of a Reformer. To deprive 
him of the use of these weapons is to disable him for action .How are you going to break 
up Caste, if people are not free to consider whether it accords with reason ? How are you 
going to break up Caste if people are not free to consider whether it accords with morality 
? The wall built around Caste is impregnable and the material, of which it is built, 
contains none of the combustible stuff of reason and morality. Add to this the fact that 
inside this wall stands the army of Brahmins, who form the intellectual class, Brahmins 
who are the natural leaders of the Hindus, Brahmins who are there not as mere mercenary 
soldiers but as an army fighting for its homeland and you will get an idea why I think that 
breaking-up of Caste amongst the Hindus is well-nigh impossible. At any rate, it would 
take ages before a breach is made. But whether the doing of the deed takes time or 
whether it can be done quickly, you must not forget that if you wish to bring about & 
breach in the system then you have got to apply the dynamite to the Vedas and the 
Shastras, which deny any part to reason, to Vedas and Shastras, which deny any part to 
morality. You must destroy the Religion of the Shrutis and the Smritis. Nothing else will 
avail. This is my considered view of the matter. 


XXII 


Some may not understand what I mean by destruction of Religion; some may find the 
idea revolting to them and some may find it revolutionary. Let me therefore explain my 
position. I do not know whether you draw a distinction between principles and rules. But 
I do. Not only I make a distinction but I say that this distinction is real and important.

Rules are practical ; they are habitual ways of doing things according to prescription. But 
principles are intellectual; they are useful methods of judging things. Rules seek to tell an 
agent just what course of action to pursue. Principles do not prescribe a specific course of 
action. Rules, like cooking recipes, do tell just what to do and how to do it. A prinsiple, 
such as that of justice, supplies a main head by reference to which he is to consider the 


bearings of his desires and purposes, it guides him in his thinking by suggesting to him 
the important consideration which he should bear in mind. This difference between rules 
and principles makes the acts done in pursuit of them different in quality and in content. 
Doing what is said to be, good by virtue of a rule and doing good in the light of a 
principle are two different things. The principle may be wrong but the act is conscious 
and responsible. The rule may be right but the act is mechanical. A religious act may not 
be a correct act but must at least be a responsible act. To permit of this responsibility, 
Religion must mainly be a matter of principles only. It cannot be a matter of rules. The 
moment it degenerates into rules it ceases to be Religion, as it kills responsibility which is 
the essence of a truly religious act. What is this Hindu Religion ? Is it a set of principles 
or is it a code of rules ? Now the Hindu Religion, as contained in the Vedas and the 
Smritis, is nothing but a mass of sacrificial, social, political and sanitary rules and 
regulations, all mixed up. What is called Religion by the Hindus is nothing but a 
multitude of commands and prohibitions. Religion, in the sense of spiritual principles, 
truly universal, applicable to all races, to all countries, to all times, is not to be found in 
them, and if it is, it does not form the governing part of a Hindu's life. That for a Hindu, 
Dharma means commands and prohibitions is clear from the way the word Dharma is 
used in Vedas and the Sinritis and understood by the commentators. The word Dharma as 
used in the Vedas in most cases means religious ordinances or rites. Even Jaimini in his 
Purva-Mimansa defines Dharma as "a desirable goal or result that is indicated by 
injunctive (Vedic) passages ". To put it in plain language, what the Hindus call Religion 
is really Law or at best legalized class-ethics. Frankly, I refuse to cull this code of 
ordinances, as Religion. The first evil of such a code of ordinances, misrepresented to the 
people as Religion, is that it tends to deprive moral life of freedom and spontaneity and to 
reduce it (for the conscientious at any rate) to a more or less anxious and servile 
conformity to externally imposed rules. Under it, there is no loyalty to ideals, there is 
only conformity to commands. But the worst evil of this code of ordinances is that the 
laws it contains must be the same yesterday, today and forever. They are iniquitous in 
that they are not the same for one class as for another. But this iniquity is made perpetual 
in that they are prescribed to be the same for all generations. The objectionable part of 
such a scheme is not that they are made by certain persons called Prophets or Law-givers. 
The objectionable part is that this code has been invested with the character of finality 
and fixity. Happiness notoriously varies with the conditions and circumstances of a 
person, as well as with the conditions of different people and epochs. That being the case, 
how can humanity endure this code of eternal laws, without being cramped and without 
being crippled ? I have, therefore, no hesitation in saying that such a religion must be 
destroyed and I say, there is nothing irreligious in working for the destruction of such a 
religion. Indeed I hold that it is your bounden duty to tear the mask, to remove the 
misrepresentation that as caused by misnaming this Law as Religion. This is an essential 
step for you. Once you clear the minds of the people of this misconception and enable 


them to realize that what they are told as Religion is not Religion but that it is really Law, 
you will be in a position to urge for its amendment or abolition. So long as people look 
upon it as Religion they will not be ready for a change, because the idea of Religion is 
generally speaking not associated with the idea of change. But the idea of law is 
associated with the idea of change and when people come to know that what is called

Religion is really Law, old and archaic, they will be ready for a change, for people know 
and accept that law can be changed. 


XXIV 


While I condemn a Religion of Rules, I must not be understood to hold the opinion that 
there is no necessity for a religion. On the contrary, I agree with Burke when he says that, 
" True religion is the foundation of society, the basis on which all true Civil Government 
rests, and both their sanction." Consequently, when I urge that these ancient rules of life 
be annulled, I am anxious that its place shall be taken by a Religion of Principles, which 
alone can lay claim to being a true Religion. Indeed, I am so convinced of the necessity 
of Religion that I feel I ought to tell you in outline what I regard as necessary items in 
this religious reform. The following in my opinion should be the cardinal items in this 
reform : ( 1 ) There should be one and only one standard book of Hindu Religion, 
acceptable to all Hindus and recognized by all Hindus. This of course means that all other 
books of Hindu religion such as Vedas, Shastras and Puranas, which are treated as sacred 
and authoritative, must by law cease to be so and the preaching of any doctrine, religious 
or social contained in these books should be penalized. (2) It should be better if 
priesthood among Hindus was abolished. But as this seems to be impossible, the 
priesthood must at least cease to be hereditary. Every person who professes to be a Hindu 
must be eligible for being a priest. It should be provided by law that no Hindu shall be 
entitled to be a priest unless he has passed an examination prescribed by the State and 
holds a sanad from the State permitting him to practise. (3) No ceremony performed by a 
priest who does not hold a sanad shall be deemed to be valid in law and it should be 
made penal for a person who has no sanad to officiate as a priest. (4) A priest should be 
the servant of the State and should be subject to the disciplinary action by the State in the 
matter of his morals, beliefs and worship, in addition to his being subject along with other 
citizens to the ordinary law of the land. (5) The number of priests should be limited by 
law according to the requirements of the State as is done in the case of the I.C.S. To 
some, this may sound radical. But to my mind there is nothing revolutionary in this. 
Every profession in India is regulated. Engineers must show proficiency, Doctor must 
show proficiency, Lawyers must show proficiency, before they are allowed to practise 
their professions. During the whole of their career, they must not only obey the law of the 
land, civil as well as criminal, but they must also obey the special code of morals 
prescribed by their respective professions. The priest's is the only profession where 


proficiency is not required. The profession of a Hindu priest is the only profession which 
is not subject to any code. Mentally a priest may be an idiot, physically a priest may be 
suffering from a foul disease, such as syphilis or gonorrheae, morally he may be a wreck. 
But he is fit to officiate at solemn ceremonies, to enter the sanctum sanctorum of a Hindu 
temple and worship the Hindu God. All this becomes possible among the Hindus because 
for a priest it is enough to be born in a priestly caste. The whole thing is abominable and 
is due to the fact that the priestly class among Hindus is subject neither to law nor to 
morality. It recognizes no duties. It knows only of rights and privileges. It is a pest which 
divinity seems to have let loose on the masses for their mental and moral degradation. 
The priestly class must be brought under control by some such legislation as I have 
outlined above. It will prevent it from doing mischief and from misguiding people. It will 
democratise it by throwing it open to every one. It will certainly help to kill the 
Brahminism and will also help to kill Caste, which is nothing but Brahminism incarnate. 
Brahminism is the poison which has spoiled Hinduism. You will succeed in saving 
Hinduism if you will kill Brahminism. There should be no opposition to this reform from 
any quarter. It should be welcomed even by the Arya Samajists, because this is merely an 
application of their own doctrine of guna-karma. 


Whether you do that or you do not, you must give a new doctrinal basis to your 
Religion—a basis that will be in consonance with Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, in

short, with Democracy. I am no authority on the subject. But I am told that for such 
religious principles as will be in consonance with Liberty, Equality and Fraternity it may 
not be necessary for you to borrow from foreign sources and that you could draw for such 
principles on the Upanishads. Whether you could do so without a complete remoulding, a 
considerable scraping and chipping off the ore they contain , is more than I can say. This 
means a complete change in the fundamental notions of life-it means a complete change 
in the values of life. It means a complete change in outlook and in attitude towards men 
and things. It means conversion but if you do not. like the word, I will say, it means new 
life. But a new life cannot enter a body that is dead. New life can center only in a new 
body. The old body must die before a new body can come into existence and a new life 
can enter into it. To put it simply: the old must cease to be operative before the new can 
begin to enliven and to pulsate. This is what I meant when I said you must discard the 
authority of the Shastras and destroy the religion of the Shastras. 


XXV 


I have kept you too long. It is time I brought this address to a close. This would have 
been a convenient point for me to have stopped. But this would probably be my last 
address to a Hindu audience on a subject vitally concerning the Hindus. I would therefore 


like, before I close, to place before the Hindus, if they will allow me, some questions 
which I regard as vital and invite them seriously to consider the same. 


In the first place, the Hindus must consider whether it is sufficient to take the placid 
view of the anthropologist that there is nothing to be said about the beliefs, habits, morals 
and outlooks on life, which obtain among the different peoples of the world except that 
they often differ ; or whether it is not necessary to make an attempt to find out what kind 
of morality, beliefs, habits and outlook have worked best and have enabled those who 
possessed them to flourish, to go strong, to people the earth and to have dominion over it. 
As is observed by Prof. Carver, " Morality and religion, as the organised expression of 
moral approval and disapproval, must be regarded as factors in the struggle for existence 
as truly as are weapons for offence and defence, teeth and claws, horns and hoofs, furs 
and feathers. The social group, community, tribe or nation, which develops an 
unworkable scheme of morality or within which those social acts which weaken it and 
unfit it for survival, habitually create the sentiment of approval, while those which would 
strengthen and enable it to be expanded habitually create the sentiment of disapproval, 
will eventually be eliminated. It is its habits of approval or disapproval (these are the 
results of religion and morality) that handicap it, as really as the possession of two wings 
on one side with none on. the other will handicap the colony of flies. It would be as futile 
in the one case as in the other to argue, that one system is just as good as another." 
Morality and religion, therefore, are not mere matters of likes and dislikes. You may 
dislike exceedingly a scheme of morality, which, if universally practised within a nation, 
would make that nation the strongest nation on the face of the earth. Yet in spite of your 
dislike such a nation will become strong. You may like exceedingly a scheme of morality 
and an ideal of justice, which if universally practised within a nation, would make it 
enable to hold its own in the struggle with other nations. Yet in spite of your admiration 
this nation will eventually disappear. The Hindus must, therefore, examine their religion 
and then morality in terms of their survival value. 


Secondly, the Hindus must consider whether they should conserve the whole of their 
social heritage or select what is helpful and transmit to future generations only that much 
and no more. Prof, John Dewey., who was my teacher and to whom I owe so much, has 
said : '" Every society gets encumbered with what is trivial, with dead wood from the past, 
and with what is positively perverse... As a society becomes more enlightened, it realizes 
that it is responsible not to conserve and transmit, the whole of its existing achievements, 
but only such as make for a better future society." Even Burke in spite of the vehemence

with which he opposed the principle of change embodied in the French Revolution, was 
compelled to admit that " a State without the means of some change is without the means 
of its conservation. Without such means it might even risk the loss of that part of the 


constitution which it wished the most religiously to preserve, " What Burke said of a 
State applies equally to a society. 


Thirdly, the Hindus must consider whether they must not cease to worship the past as 
supplying its ideals. The beautiful effect of this worship of the past are best summed up 
by Prof. Dewey when he says : " An individual can live only in the present. The present 
is not just something which comes after the past ; much less something produced by it. It 
is what life is in leaving the past behind it. The study of past products will not help us to 
understand the present. A knowledge of the past and its heritage is of great significance 
when it enters into the present, but not otherwise. And the mistake of making the-records 
and remains of the past the main material of education is that it tends to make the past a 
rival of the present and the present a more or less futile imitation of the past." The 
principle, which makes little of the present act of living and growing, naturally looks 
upon the present as empty and upon the future as remote. Such a principle is inimical to 
progress and is an hindrance to a strong and a steady current of life. 


Fourthly, the Hindus must consider whether the time has not come for them to 
recognize that there is nothing fixed, nothing eternal, nothing sanatan; that everything is 
changing, that change is the law of life for individuals as well as for society. In a 
changing society, there must be a constant revolution of old values and the Hindus must 
realize that if there must be standards to measure the acts of men there must also be a 
readiness to revise those standards. 


XXVI 


I have to confess that this address has become too lengthy. Whether this fault is 
compensated to any extent by breadth or depth is a matter for you to judge. All I claim is 
to have told you candidly my views. I have little to recommend them but some study and 
a deep concern in your destiny. If you will allow me to say, these views are the views of a 
man, who has been no tool of power, no flatterer of greatness. They come from one, 
almost the whole of whose public exertion has been one continuous struggle for liberty 
for the poor and for the oppressed and whose only reward has been a continuous shower 
of calumny and abuse from national journals and national leaders, for no other reason 
except that I refuse to join with them in performing the miracle—I will not say trick—of 
liberating the oppressed with the gold of the tyrant and raising the poor with the cash of 
the rich. All this may not be enough to commend my views. I think they are not likely to 
alter yours. But whether they do or do not, the responsibility is entirely yours. You must 
make your efforts to uproot Caste, if not in my way, then in your way. I am sorry, I will 
not be with you. I have decided to change. This is not the place for giving reasons. But 
even when I am gone out of your fold, I will watch your movement with active sympathy 
and you will have my assistance for what it may be worth. Yours is a national cause. 


Caste is no doubt primarily the breath of the Hindus. But the Hindus have fouled the air 
all over and everybody is infected, Sikh, Muslim and Christian. You, therefore, deserve 
the support of all those who are suffering from this infection, Sikh, Muslim and Christian. 
Yours is more difficult than the other national cause, namely Swaraj. In the fight for 
Swaraj you fight with the whole nation on your side. In this, you have to fight against the 
whole nation and that too, your own. But it is more important than Swaraj. There is no 
use having Swaraj, if you cannot defend it. More important than the question of 
defending Swaraj is the question of defending the Hindus under the Swaraj. In my 
opinion only when the Hindu Society becomes a casteless society that it can hope to have 
strength enough to defend itself. Without such internal strength, Swaraj for Hindus may 
turn out to be only a step towards slavery. Good-bye and good wishes for your success. 


APPENDIX I 


A VINDICATION OF CASTE BY MAHATMA GANDHI 
(A Reprint of his Articles in the " Harijan ") 
Dr. Ambedkar's Indictment I

The readers will recall the fact that Dr. Ambedkar was to have presided last May at the 
annual conference of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore. But the conference itself was 
cancelled because Dr. Ambedkar's address was found by the Reception Committee to be 
unacceptable. How far a Reception Committee is justified in rejecting a President of its 
choice because of his address that may be objectionable to it is open to question. The 
Committee knew Dr. Ambedkar's views on caste and the Hindu scriptures. They knew 
also that he had in unequivocal terms decided to give up Hinduism. Nothing less than the 
address that Dr. Ambedkar had prepared was to be expected from him. The committee 
appears to have deprived the public of an opportunity of listening to the original views of 
a man, who has carved out for himself a unique position in society. Whatever label he 
wears in future, Dr. Ambedkar is not the man to allow himself to be forgotten. 


Dr. Ambedkar was not going to be beaten by the Reception Committee. He has 
answered their rejection of him by publishing the address at his own expense. He has 
priced it at 8 annas, I would suggest a reduction to 2 annas or at least 4 annas. 


No reformer can ignore the address. The orthodox will gain by reading it. This is not to 
say that the address is not open to objection. It has to be read only because it is open to 
serious objection. Dr. Ambedkar is a challenge to Hinduism. Brought up as a Hindu, 
educated by a Hindu potentate, he has become so disgusted with the so-called Savarna 
Hindus for the treatment that he and his people have received at their hands that he 
proposes to leave not only them but the very religion that is his and their common 
heritage. He has transferred to that religion, his disgust against a part of its professors. 


But this is not to be wondered at. After all, one can only judge a system or an institution 
by the conduct of its representatives. What is more. Dr. Ambedkar found that the vast 
majority of Savarna Hindus had not only conducted themselves inhumanly against those 
of their fellow religionists, whom they classed as untouchables, but they had based their 
conduct on the authority of their scriptures, and when he began to search them he had 
found ample warrant for their beliefs in untouchability and all its implications. The author 
of the address has quoted chapter and verse in proof of his three-fold indictment— 
inhuman conduct itself, the unabashed justification for it on the part of the perpetrators, 
and the subsequent discovery that the justification was warranted by their scriptures. 


No Hindu who prizes his faith above life itself can afford to underrate the importance 
of this indictment. Dr Ambedkar is not alone in his disgust He is its most 
uncompromising exponent and one of the ablest among them. He is certainly the most 
irreconcilable among them. Thank God, in the front rank of the leaders, he is singularly 
alone and as yet but a representative of a very small minority. But what he says is voiced 
with more or less vehemence by many leaders belonging to the depressed classes. Only 
the latter, for instance Rao Bahadur M. C. Rajah and Dewan Bahadur Srinivasan, not 
only do not threaten to give up Hinduism but find enough warmth in it to compensate for 
the shameful persecution to which the vast mass of Harijans are exposed. 


But the fact of many leaders remaining in the Hindu fold is no warrant for disregarding 
what Dr. Ambedkar has to say. The Savaraas have to correct their belief and their 
conduct. Above all those who are by their learning and influence among the Savarnas 
have to give an authoritative interpretation of the scriptures. The questions that Dr. 
Ambedkar's indictment suggest are : 


(1) What are the scriptures ? 


(2) Are all the printed texts to be regarded as an integral part of them or is any part 
of them to be rejected as unauthorised interpolation ? 


(3) What is the answer of such accepted and expurgated scriptures on the question 
of untouchability, caste, equality of status, inter-dining and intermarriages ? 
(These have been all examined by Dr. Ambedkar in his address.) 


I must reserve for the next issue my own answer to these questions and a statement of 
the (at least some) manifest flaws in Dr. Ambedkar's thesis 


(Harijan, July I, 1936) 


II 


The Vedas, Upanishads, Smritis and Puranas including Ramayana and Mahabharata

are the Hindu Scriptures. Nor is this a finite list. Every age or even. generation has added 
to the list. It follows, therefore, that everything printed or even found handwritten is not 
scripture. The Smrities for instance-contain much that can never be accepted as the word 
of God. Thus. many of the texts that Dr. Ambedkar quotes from the Smritis cannot be 
accepted as authentic. The scriptures, properly so-called, can only be concerned with 
eternal varieties and must appeal to any conscience i.e. any heart whose eyes of 
understanding are opened. Nothing can be accepted as the word of God which cannot be 
tested by reason or be capable of being spiritually experienced. And even when you have 
an expurgated edition of the scriptures, you will need their interpretation. Who is the best 
interpreter? Not learned men surely. Learning there must be. But religion does not live it. 
It lives in the experiences of its saints and seers, in their lives and sayings. When all the 
most learned commentators of the scriptures are utterly forgotten, the accumulated 
experience of the sages and saints will abide and be an inspiration for ages to come. 


Caste has nothing to do with religion. It is a custom whose origin I do not know and do 
not need to know for the satisfaction of my spiritual hunger. But I do know that it is 
harmful both to spiritual and national growth. Varna and Ashrama are institutions which 
have nothing to do with castes .The law of Varna teaches us that we have each one of us 
to earn our bread by following the ancestral calling. it defines not our rights but our 
duties. It necessarily has reference to callings that are conducive to the welfare of 
humanity and to no other. It also follows that there is no calling too low and none too 
high. Ail are good, lawful and absolutely equal in status. The callings of a Brahmin— 
spiritual teacher—-and a scavenger are equal, and their due performance carries equal 
merit before God and at one time seems to have carried identical reward before man. 
Both were entitled to their livelihood and no more. Indeed one traces even now in the 
villages the faint lines of this healthy operation of the law. Living in Segaon with its 
population of 600, I do not find a great disparity between the earnings of different 
tradesmen including Brahmins. I find too that real Brahmins are to be found even in these 
degenerate days who are living on alms freely given to them and are giving freely of what 
they have of spiritual treasures. It would be wrong and improper to judge the law of 
Varna by its caricature in the lives of men who profess to belong to a Varna, whilst they 
openly commit a breach of its only operative rule. Arrogation of a superior status by and 
of the Varna over another is a denial of the law. And there is nothing in the law of Varna 
to warrant a belief in untouchability. (The essence of Hinduism is contained in its 
enunciation of one and only God as Truth and its bold acceptance of Ahimsa as the law 
of the human family.) 


I am aware that my interpretation of Hinduism will be disputed by many besides Dr. 
Ambedkar. That does not affect my position. It is an interpretation by which I have lived 


for nearly half a century and according to which I have endeavoured to the best of my 
ability to regulate my life. 


In my opinion the profound mistake that Dr. Ambedkar has made in his address is to 
pick out the texts of doubtful authenticity and value and the state of degraded Hindus 
who are no fit specimens of the faith they so woefully misrepresent. Judged by the 
standard applied by Dr. Ambedkar, every known living faith will probably fail. 


In his able address, the learned Doctor has over proved his case. Can a religion that was 
professed by Chaitanya, Jnyandeo, Tukaram, Tiruvailuvar, Rarnkrishna Paramahansa, 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Maharshi Devendranath Tagore, Vivekanand and host of others 
who might be easily mentioned, so utterly devoid of merit as is made out in Dr. 
Ambedkar's address ? A religion has to be judged not by it's worst specimens but by the 
best it might have produced. For that and that alone can be used as the standard to aspire 
to, if not to improve upon. (Harijan, July 18, 1936) 


lil 
VARNA VERSUS CASTE 


Shri Sant Ramji of the Jat-Pat-Todak Mandal of Lahore wants me to publish the 
following: " I have read your remarks about Dr. Ambedkar and the Jat-Pat-Todak

Mandal, Lahore. In that connection I beg to submit as follows : 


"We did not invite Dr. Ambedkar to preside over our conference because he 
belonged to the Depressed Classes, for we do not distinguish between a touchable 
and an untouchable Hindu. On the contrary our choice fell on him simply because his 
diagnosis of the fatal disease of the Hindu community was the same as ours, i.e. he 
too was of the opinion that caste system was the root cause of the disruption and 
downfall of the Hindus. The subject of the Doctor's thesis for Doctorate being caste 
system, he has studied the subject thoroughly. Now the object of our conference was 
to persuade the Hindus to annihilate castes but the advice of a non-Hindu in social 
and religious matters can have no effect on them. The Doctor in the supplementary 
portion of his address insisted on saying that that was his last speech as a Hindu, 
which was irrelevant as well as pernicious to the interests of the conference. So we 
requested him to expunge that sentence for he could easily say the same thing on any 
other occasion. But he refused and we saw no utility in making merely a show of our 
function. In spite of all this, I cannot help praising his address which is, as far as I 
know, the most learned thesis on the subject and worth translating into every 
vernacular of India. 


Moreover, I want to bring to your notice that your philosophical difference 
between Caste and Varna is too subtle to be grasped by people in general, because 
for all practical purposes in the Hindu society Caste and Varna are one and the same 
thing, for the function of both of them is one and the same i.e. to restrict inter-caste 
marriages and inter-dining. Your theory of Varnavyavastha is impracticable in this 
age and there is no hope of its revival in the near future. But Hindus are slaves of 
caste and do not want to destroy it. So when you advocate your ideal of imaginary 
Varnavyavastha they find justification for clinging to caste. Thus you are doing a 
great disservice to social reform by advocating your imaginary utility of division of 
Varnas, for it creates hindrance in our way. To try to remove untouchability without 
striking at the root of Varnavyavastha is simply to treat the outward symptoms of a 
disease or to draw a line on the surface of water. As in the heart of their hearts dvijas 
do not want to give social equality to the so-called touchable and untouchable 
Shudras, so they refuse to break caste, and give liberal donations for the removal of 
untouchability, simply to evade the issue. To seek the help of the Shastras for the 
removal of untouchability and caste is simply to wash mud with mud." 


The last paragraph of the letter surely cancels the first. If the Mandal rejects the help of 
the Shastras, they do exactly what Dr. Ambedkar does, i.e. cease to be Hindus. How then 
can they object to Dr. Ambedkar's address merely because he said that that was his last 
speech as a Hindu ? The position appears to be wholly untenable especially when the 
Mandal, for which Shri Sant Ram claims to speak, applauds the whole argument of Dr. 
Ambedkar's address. 


But it is pertinent to ask what the Mandal believes if it rejects the Shastras. How can a 
Muslim remain one if he rejects the Quran ,or a Christian remain Christian if he rejects 
the Bible ? If Caste and Varna are convertible terms and if Varna is an integral part of the 
Shastras which define Hinduism, I do not know how a person who rejects Caste i.e. 
Varna can call himself a Hindu. 


Shri Sant Ram likens the Shastras to mud. Dr. Ambedkar has not, so far as I remember, 
given any such picturesque name to the Shastras. I have certainly meant when I have said 
that if Shastras support the existing untouchability I should cease to call myself a Hindu. 
Similarly, if the Shastras support caste as we know it today in all its hideousness, I may 
not call myself or remain a Hindu since I have no scruples about interdining or 
intermarriage. I need not repeat my position regarding Shastras and their interpretation. I 
venture to suggest to Shri Sant Ram that it is the only rational and correct and morally 
defensible position and it has ample warrant in Hindu tradition. 


(Harijan, August 15,1936) 


APPENDIX II 
A REPLY TO THE MAHATMA BY DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR 


I appreciate greatly the honour done me by the Mahatma in taking notice in his Harijan of

the speech on Caste which I had prepared for the Jat Pat Todak Mandal. From a perusal 
of his review of my speech it is clear that the Mahatma completely dissents from the 
views I have expressed on the subject of Caste. I am not in the habit of entering into 
controversy with my opponents unless there are special reasons which compel me to act 
otherwise. Had my opponent been some mean and obscure person I would not have 
pursued him. But my opponent being the Mahatma himself I feel I must attempt to meet 
the case to the contrary which he has sought to put forth. While I appreciate the honour 
he has done me, I must confess to a sense of surprize on finding that of all the persons the 
Mahatma should accuse me of a desire to seek publicity as he seems to do when he 
suggests that in publishing the undelivered speech my object was to see that I was not " 
forgotten ". Whatever the Mahatma may choose to say my object in publishing the speech 
was to provoke the Hindus to think and take stock of their position. I have never 
hankered for publicity and if I may say so, I have more of it than I wish or need. But 
supposing it was out of the motive of gaining publicity that I printed the speech who 
could cast a stone at me ? Surely not those, who like the Mahatma live in glass houses. 


II 


Motive apart, what has the Mahatma to say on the question raised by me in the speech ? 
First of all any one who reads my speech will realize that the Mahatma has entirely 
missed the issues raised by me and that the issues he has raised are not the issues that 
arise out of what he is pleased to call my indictment of the Hindus. The principal points 
which I have tried to make out in my speech may be catalogued as follows : (1) That 
caste has ruined the Hindus ; (2) That the reorganization of the Hindu society on the basis 
of Chaturvarnya is impossible because the Varnavym'astha is like a leaky pot or like a 
man running at the nose. It is incapable of sustaining itself by its own virtue and has an 
inherent tendency to degenerate into a caste system unless there is a legal sanction behind 
it which can be enforced against every one transgressing his Varna ; (3) That the 
reorganization of the Hindu Society on the basis of Chaturvarnya is harmful, because the 
effect of the Varnavyavastha is to degrade the masses by denying them opportunity to 
acquire knowledge and to emasculate them by denying them the right to be armed ; (4) 
That the Hindu society must be reorganized on a religious basis which would recognise 
the principles of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity ; (5) That in order to achieve this object 
the sense of religious sanctity behind Caste and Varna must be destroyed ; (6) That the 
sanctity of Caste and Varna can be destroyed only by discarding the divine authority of 


the Shastras. It will be noticed that the questions raised by the Mahatma are absolutely 
beside the point and show that the main argument of the speech was lost upon him. 


Ill 


Let me examine the substance of the points made by the Mahatma. The first point made 
by the Mahatma is that the texts cited by me are not authentic. I confess I am no authority 
on this matter. But I should like to state that the texts cited by me are all taken from the 
writings of the late Mr. Tilak who was a recognised authority on the Sanskrit language 
and on the Hindu Shastras. His second point is that these Shastras should be interpreted 
not by the learned but the saints and that, as the saints have understood them, the Shastras 
do not support Caste and Untouchabilty. As regards the first point what I like to ask the 
Mahatma is what does it avail to any one if the texts are interpolations and if they have 
been differently interpreted by the saints ? The masses do not make any distinction 
between texts which are genuine and texts which are interpolations. The masses do not 
know what the texts are. They are too illiterate to know the contents of the Shastras. They 
have believed what they have been told and what they have been told is that the Shastras 
do enjoin as a religious duty the observance of Caste and Untouchability. 


With regard to the saints, one must admit that howsoever different and elevating their 
teachings may have been as compared to those of the merely learned they have been 
lamentably ineffective. They have been ineffective for two reasons. Firstly, none of the

saints ever attacked the Caste System. On the contrary, they were staunch believers in the 
System of Castes. Most of them lived and died. as members of the castes which they 
respectively belonged. So passionately attached was Jnyandeo to his status as a Brahmin 
that when the Brahmins of Paithan would not admit him to their fold he moved heaven 
and earth to get his status as a Brahmin recognized by the Brahmin fraternity. And even 
the saint Eknath who now figures in the film " Dharmatma " as a hero for having shown 
courage to touch the untouchables and dine with them, did so not because he was 
opposed to Caste and Untouchability but because he felt that the pollution caused thereby 
could be washed away by a bath in the sacred waters of the river Ganges.* The saints 
have never according to my study carried on a campaign against. Caste and 
Untouchability. They were not concerned with the struggle between men. They were 
concerned with the relation between man and God. They did not preach that all men were 
equal. They preached that all men were equal, in the eyes of God a very different and a 
very innocuous proposition which nobody can find difficult to preach or dangerous to 
believe in. The second reason why the teachings of the saints proved ineffective was 
because the masses have been taught that a saint might break Caste but the common man 
must not. A saint therefore never became an example to follow. He always remained a 
pious man to be honoured. That the masses have remained staunch believers in Caste and 


Untouchability shows that the pious lives and noble sermons of the saints have had no 
effect on their life and conduct as against the teachings of the Shastras. Thus it can be a 
matter of no consolation that there were saints or that there is a Mahatma who 
understands the Shastras differently from the learned few or ignorant many. That the 
masses hold different view of the Shastras is fact which should and must be reckoned 
with. How is that to be dealt with except by denouncing the authority of the Shastras, 
which continue to govern their conduct, is a question which the Mahatma has not 
considered. But whatever the plan the Mahatma puts forth as an effective means to free 
the masses from the teachings of the Shastras, he must accept that the pious life led by 
one good Samaritan may be very elevating to himself but in India, with the attitude the 
common man has to saints and to Mahatmas—to honour but not to follow—one cannot 
make much out of it. 


IV 


The third point made by the Mahatma is that a religion professed by Chaitanya, 
Jnyandeo, Tukaram, Tiruvalluvar, Rarnkrishna Paramahansa etc. cannot be devoid of 
merit as is made out by me and that a religion has to be judged not by its worst specimens 
but by the best it might have produced. I agree with every word of this statement. But I 
do not quite understand what the Mahatma wishes to prove thereby. That religion should 
be judged not by its worst specimens but by its best is true enough but does it dispose of 
the matter ? I say it does not. The question still remains—why the worst number so many 
and the best so few ? To my mind there are two conceivable answers to this question : ( 1 
) That the worst by reason of some original perversity of theirs are morally uneducable 
and are therefore incapable of making the remotest approach to the religious ideal. Or (2) 
That the religious ideal is a wholly wrong ideal which has given a wrong moral twist to 
the lives of the many and that the best have become best in spite of the wrong ideal—in 
fact by giving to the wrong twist a turn in the right direction. Of these two explanations I 
am not prepared to accept the first and I am sure that even the Mahatma will not insist 
upon the contrary. To my mind the second is the only logical and reasonable explanation 
unless the Mahatma has a third alternative to explain why the worst are so many and the 
best so few. If the second is the only explanation then obviously the argument of the 
Mahatma that a religion should be judged by its best followers carries us nowhere except 
to pity the lot of the many who have gone wrong because they have been made to 
worship wrong ideals. 


Vv 


The argument of the Mahatma that Hinduism would be tolerable if only many were to 
follow the example of the saints is fallacious for another reason. By citing the names of

such illustrious persons as Chaitanya etc. what the Mahatma seems to me to suggest in its 


broadest and simplest form is that Hindu society can be made tolerable and even happy 
without any fundamental change in its structure if all the high caste Hindus can be 
persuaded to follow a high standard of morality in their dealings with the low caste 
Hindus. I am totally opposed to this kind of ideology. I can respect those of the caste 
Hindus who try to realize a high social ideal in their life. Without such men India would 
be an uglier and a less happy place to live in than it is. But nonetheless anyone who relies 
on an attempt to turn the members of the caste Hindus into better men by improving their 
personal character is in my judgment wasting his energy and bugging an illusion. Can 
personal character make the maker of armaments a good man, i.e. a man who will sell 
shells that will not burst and gas that will not poison ? If it cannot, how can you accept 
personal character to make a man loaded with the consciousness of Caste, a good man, 
i.e. aman who would treat his fellows as his friends and equals ? To be true to himself he 
must deal with his fellows either as a superior or inferior according as the case may be; at 
any rate, differently from his own caste fellows. He can never be expected to deal with 
his fellows as his kinsmen and equals. As a matter of fact, a Hindu does treat all those 
who are not of his Caste as though they were aliens, who could be discriminated against 
with impunity and against whom any fraud or trick may be practised without shame. This 
is to say that there can be a better or a worse Hindu. But a good Hindu there cannot be. 
This is so not because there is anything wrong with his personal character. In fact what is 
wrong is the entire basis of his relationship to his fellows. The best of men cannot be 
moral if the basis of relationship between them and their fellows is fundamentally a 
wrong relationship. To a slave his master may be better or worse. But there cannot be a 
good master. A good man cannot be a master and a master cannot be a good man. The 
same applies to the relationship between high caste and low caste. To a low caste man a 
high caste man can be better or worse as compared to other high caste men. A high caste 
man cannot be a good man in so far as he must have a low caste man to distinguish him 
as high caste man. It cannot be good to a low caste man to be conscious that there is a 
high caste man above him. I have argued in my speech that a society based on Varna or 
Caste is a society which is based on a wrong relationship. I had hoped that the Mahatma 
would attempt to demolish my argument. But instead of doing that he has merely 
reiterated his belief in Chaturvarnya without disclosing the ground on which it is based. 


VI 


Does the Mahatma practise what he preaches ? One does not like to make personal 
reference in an argument which is general in its application. But when one preaches a 
decline and holds it as a dogma there is a curiosity to know how far he practises what he 
preaches. It may be that his failure to practise is due to the ideal being too high. to be 
attainable; it may be that his failure to practise is due to the innate hypocrisy of the man. 
In any case he exposes his conduct to examination and I must not be blamed if I asked 


how far has the Mahatma attempted to realize his ideal in his own case. The Mahatma is a 
Bania by birth. His ancestors had abandoned trading in favour of ministership which is a 
calling of the Brahmins. In his own life, before he became a Mahatma, when occasion 
came for him to choose his career he preferred law to scales. On abandoning law he 
became half saint and half politician. He has never touched trading which is his ancestral 
calling. His youngest son—I take one who is a faithful follower of his father—born a 
Vaishya has married a Brahmin's daughter and has chosen to serve a newspaper magnate. 
The Mahatma is not known to have condemned him for not following his ancestral 
calling. It may be wrong and uncharitable to judge an ideal by its worst specimens. But 
surely the Mahatma as a specimen has no better and if he even fails to realize the ideal 
then the ideal must be an impossible ideal quite opposed to the practical instincts of man. 
Students of Carlyle know that he often spoke on a subject before he thought about it. I

wonder whether such has not been the case with the Mahatma in regard to the subject 
matter of Caste. Otherwise certain questions which occur to me would not have escaped 
him. When can a calling be deemed to have become an ancestral calling so as to make it 
binding on a man ? Must man follow his ancestral calling even if it does not suit his 
capacities, even when it has ceased to be profitable ? Must a man live by his ancestral 
calling even if he finds it to be immoral ? If every one must pursue his ancestral calling 
then it must follow that a man must. continue to be a pimp because his grandfather was a 
pimp and a woman must continue to be a prostitute because her grandmother was a 
prostitute. Is the Mahatma prepared to accept the logical conclusion of his doctrine ? To 
me bis ideal of following one's ancestral calling is not only an impossible and impractical 
ideal, but it is also morally an indefensible ideal. VII 


The Mahatma sees great virtue in a Brahmin remaining a Brahmin all his life. Leaving 
aside the fact there are many Brahmins who do not like to remain Brahmins ail their 
lives. What can we say about those Brahmins who have clung to their ancestral calling of 
priesthood ? Do they do so from any faith in the virtue of the principle of ancestral 
calling or do they do so from motives of filthy lucre ? The Mahatma does not seem to 
concern himself with such queries. He is satisfied that these are " real Brahmins who are 
living on alms freely given to them and giving freely what they have of spiritual treasures 
". This is how a hereditary Brahmin priest appears to the Mahatma—a carrier of spiritual 
treasurers. But another portrait of the hereditary Brahmin can also be drawn. A Brahmin 
can be a priest to Vishnu—the God of Love. He can be a priest to Shankar—the God. of 
Destruction. He can be a priest at Buddha Gaya worshipping Buddha—the greatest 
teacher of mankind who taught the noblest doctrine of Love. He also can be a priest to 
Kali, the Goddess, who must have a daily sacrifice of an animal to satisfy her thirst for 
blood ; He will be a priest of the temple of Rama—the Kshatriya God! He will also be a 
priest of the Temple of Parshuram, the God who took Avatar to destroy the Kshatriyas ! 
He can be a priest to Bramha, the Creator of the world. He can be a priest to a Pir whose 


God Allah will not brook the claim of Bramha to share his spiritual dominion over the 
world ! No one can say that this is a picture which is not true to life. If this is a true 
picture one does not know what to say of this capacity to bear loyalties to Gods and 
Goddesses whose attributes are so antagonistic that no honest man can be a devotee to all 
of them. The Hindus rely upon this extraordinary phenomenon as evidence of the greatest 
virtue of their religion—namely its catholicity, its spirit of toleration. As against this 
facile view, it can be urged that what is toleration and catholicity may be really nothing 
more creditable than indifference or flaccid latitudinarianism. These two attitudes are 
hard to distinguish in their outer seeming. But they are so vitally unlike in their real 
quality that no one who examines them closely can mistake one for the other. That a man 
is ready to render homage to many Gods and Goddesses may be. cited as evidence of his 
tolerant spirit.. But can it not also be evidence of insincerity born of a desire to serve the 
times ? I am sure that this toleration is merely insincerity. If this view is well founded, 
one may ask what spiritual treasure can there be with a person who is ready to be a priest 
and a devotee to any deity which it serves his purpose to worship and to adore ? Not only 
must such a person be deemed to be bankrupt of all spiritual treasures but for him to 
practice so elevating a profession as that of a priest simply because it is ancestral, without 
faith, without belief, merely as a mechanical process handed down from. father to son, is 
not a conservation of virtue; it is really the prostitution of a noble profession which is no 
other than the service of religion. 


VI 


Why does the Mahatma cling to the theory of every one following his or her ancestral 
calling ? He gives his reasons nowhere But there must be some reason although he does 
not cars to avow it. Years ago writing on " Caste versus Class " in his Young India he 
argued that Caste System was better than Class System on the ground that caste was the

best possible adjustment of social stability. If that be the reason why the Mahatma clings 
to the theory of every one following his or her ancestral calling, then he is clinging to a 
false view of social life. Everybody wants social stability and some adjustment must be 
made in the relationship between individuals and classes in order that stability may be 
had. But two things, I am sure nobody wants. One thing nobody wants is static 
relationship, something that is unalterable, something that is fixed for all times. Stability 
is wanted but not at the cost of change when change is imperative. Second thing nobody 
wants is mere adjustment. Adjustment is wanted but not at the sacrifice of social justice. 
Can it be said that the adjustment of social relationship on the basis of caste i.e. on the 
basis of each to his hereditary calling avoids these two evils ? Iam convinced that it does 
not. Far from being the best possible adjustment I have no doubt that it is of the worst 
possible kind inasmuch as it offends against both the canons of social adjustment— 
namely fluidity and equity. 


Ix 


Some might think that the Mahatma has made much progress inasmuch as he now only 
believes in Varna and docs not believe in Caste. It is true that there was a time when the 
Mahatma was a full-blooded and a blue-blooded Sanatani Hindu. He believed in the 
Vedas, the Upanishads, the Puranas and all that goes by the name of Hindu scriptures 
and therefore in avatars and rebirth. He believed in Caste and defended it with the vigour 
of the orthodox. He condemned the cry for inter-dining, inter-drinking and inter-marrying 
and argued that restraints about inter-dining to a great extent " helped the cultivation of 
will-power and the conservation of certain social virtue ". It is good that he has 
repudiated this sanctimonious nonsense and admitted that caste " is harmful both to 
spiritual and national growth," and may be, his son's marriage outside his caste has had 
something to do with this change of view. But has the Mahatma really progressed ? What 
is the nature of the Varna for which the Mahatma stands ? Is it the Vedic conception as 
commonly understood and preached by Swami Dayanaad Saraswati and his followers, 
the Arya Samajists ? The essence of the Vedic conception of Varna is the pursuit of a 
calling which is appropriate to one's natural aptitude. The essence of the Mahatma's 
conception of Varna is the pursuit of ancestral calling irrespective of natural aptitude. 
What is the difference between Caste and Varna as understood by the Mahatma? I find 
none. As defined by the Mahatma, Varna becomes merely a different name for Caste for 
the simple reason that it is the same in essence—namely pursuit of ancestral calling. Far 
from making progress the Mahatma has suffered retrogression. By putting this 
interpretation upon the Vedic conception of Varna he has really made ridiculous what 
was sublime. While I reject the Vedic Varnavyavastha for reasons given in the speech I 
must admit that the Vedic theory of Varna as interpreted by Swami Dayanand and some 
others is a sensible and an inoffensive thing. It did not admit birth as a determining factor 
in fixing the place of an individual in society. It only recognized worth. The Mahatma's 
view of Varna not only makes nonsense of the Vedic Varna but it makes it an abominable 
thing. Varna and Caste are two very different concepts. Varna is based on the principle of 
each according to his worth-while Caste is based on the principle of each according to his 
birth. The two are as distinct as chalk is from cheese. In fact there is an antithesis 
between the two. If the Mahatma believes as he does in every one following his or her 
ancestral calling, then most certainly he is advocating the Caste System and that in 
calling it the Varna System he is not only guilty of terminologicale inexactitude, but he is 
causing confusion worse confounded. I am sure that all his confusion is due to the fact 
that the Mahatma has no definite and clear conception as to what is Varna and what is 
Caste and as to the necessity of either for the conservation of Hinduism. He has said and 
one hopes that he will not find some mystic reason to change his view that caste is not the 
essence of Hinduism. Does he regard Varna as the essence of Hinduism ? One cannot as 
yet give any categorical answer. Readers of his article on " Dr. Ambedkar's Indictment "

will answer " No ". In that article he does not say that the dogma of Varna is an essential 
part of the creed of Hinduism. Far from making Varna the essence of Hinduism he says " 
the essence of Hinduism is contained in its enunciation of one and only God as Truth and 
its bold acceptance of Ahimsa as the law of the human family " But the readers of his 
article in reply to Mr. Sant Ram will say " Yes ". In that article he says " How can a 
Muslim remain one if he rejects the Qurtan, or a Christian remain as Christian if he 
rejects the Bible ? If Caste and Varna are convertible terms and if Varna is an integral 
part of the Shastras which define Hinduism I do not know how a person who rejects 
Caste, i.e. Varna can call himself a Hindu ? " Why this prevarication ? Why does the 
Mahatma hedge ? Whom does he want to please ? Has the saint failed to sense the truth ? 
Or does the politician stand in the way of the Saint ? The real reason why the Mahatma is 
suffering from this confusion is probably to be traced to two sources. The first is the 
temperament of the Mahatma. He has almost in everything the simplicity of the child 
with the child's capacity for self-deception. Like a child he can believe in anything he 
wants to believe. We must therefore wait till such time as it pleases the Mahatma to 
abandon his faith in Varna as it has pleased him to abandon his faith in Caste. The second 
source of confusion is the double role which the Mahatma wants to play—of a Mahatma 
and a Politician. As a Mahatma he may be trying to spiritualize Politics. Whether he has 
succeeded in it or not Politics have certainly commercialized him. A politician must 
know that Society cannot bear the whole truth and that he must not speak the whole truth; 
if he is speaking the whole truth it is bad for his politics. The reason why the Mahatma is 
always supporting Caste and Varna is because he is afraid that if he opposed them he will 
lose his place in politics. Whatever may be the source of this confusion the Mahatma 
must be told that he is deceiving himself and also deceiving the people by preaching 
Caste under the name of Varna. 


Xx 


The Mahatma says that the standards I have applied to test Hindus and Hinduism are 
too severe and that judged by those standards every known living faith will probably fail. 
The complaint that my standards are high may be true. But the question is not whether 
they are high or whether they are low. The question is whether they are the right 
standards to apply. A People and their Religion must be judged by social standards based 
on social ethics. No other standard would have any meaning if religion is held to be a 
necessary good for the well-being of the people. Now I maintain that the standards I have 
applied to test Hindus and Hinduism are the most appropriate standards and that I know 
of none that are better. The conclusion that every known religion would fail if tested by 
my standards may be true. But this fact should not give the Mahatma as the champion of 
Hindus and Hinduism a ground for comfort any more than the existence of one madman 
should give comfort to another madman or the existence of one criminal should give 


comfort to another criminal. I like to assure the Mahatma that it is not the mere failure of 
the Hindus and Hinduism which has produced in me the feelings of disgust and contempt 
with which. I am charged. I realize that the world is a very imperfect world and any one 
who wants to live in it must bear with its imperfections. But while I am. prepared to bear 
with the imperfections and shortcomings of the society in which I may be destined to 
labour, I feel I should not consent to live in a society which cherishes wrong ideals or a 
society which having right ideals will not consent to bring its social life in conformity 
with those ideals. If I am disgusted with Hindus and Hinduism it is because I am 
convinced that they cherish wrong ideals and live a wrong social life. My quarrel with 
Hindus and Hinduism is not over the imperfections of their social conduct. It is much 
more fundamental. It is over their ideals. 


XI 


Hindu society seems to me to stand in need of a moral regeneration which it is 
dangerous to postpone. And the question is who can determine and control this moral 
regeneration ? Obviously only those who have undergone an intellectual regeneration and

those who are honest enough to have the courage of their convictions born of intellectual 
emancipation. Judged by this standard the Hindu leaders who count are in my opinion 
quite unfit for the task. It is impossible to say that they have undergone the preliminary 
intellectual regeneration. If they had undergone an intellectual regeneration they would 
neither delude themselves in the simple way of the untaught multitude nor would they 
take advantage of the primitive ignorance of others as one sees them doing. 
Notwithstanding the crumbling state of Hindu society these leaders will nevertheless 
unblushingly appeal to ideals of the past which have in every way ceased to have any 
connection with the present ; which however suitable they might have been in the days of 
their origin have now become a warning rather than a guide. They still have a mystic 
respect for the earlier forms which make them disinclined—nay opposed to any 
examination of the foundations of their Society. The Hindu masses are cf course 
incredibly heedless in the formation of their beliefs. But so are the Hindu leaders. And 
what is worse is that. These Hindu leaders become filled with an illicit passion for their 
beliefs when any one proposes to rob them of their companionship. The Mahatma. is no 
exception. The Mahatma appears not to believe in thinking He prefers to follow the 
saints. Like a conservative with his reverence for consecrated notions he is afraid that if 
he once starts thinking, many ideals and institutions to which lie clings will be doomed. 
One must sympathize with him. For every act of independent thinking puts some portion 
of apparently stable world in peril. But it is equally true that dependence on saints cannot 
lead us to know the truth. The saints are after all only human beings and as Lord Balfour 
said , " the human mind is no more a truth finding apparatus than the snout of a pig ". In 
so far as he does think, to me he really appears to be prostituting his intelligence to find 


reasons for supporting this archaic social structure of the Hindus. He is the most 
influential apologist of it and therefore the worst enemy of the Hindus. 


Unlike the Mahatma there are Hindu leaders who are not content merely to believe and 
follow. They dare to think, and act in, accordance with the result of their thinking. But 
unfortunately they are either a dishonest lot or an indifferent lot when it comes to the 
question of giving right guidance to the mass of the people. Almost every Brahmin has 
transgressed the rule of Caste. The number of Brahmins who sell shoes is far greater than 
those who practise priesthood. Not only have the Brahmins given up their ancestral 
calling of priesthood for trading but they have entered trades which, are prohibited to 
them by the Shaslras. Yet how many Brahmins who break Caste every day will preach 
against Caste and against the Shastras ? For one honest Brahmin preaching against Caste 
and Shastras because his practical instinct and moral conscience cannot support a 
conviction in them, there are hundreds who break Caste and trample upon the Shastras 
every day but who are the most fanatic upholders of the theory of Caste and the sanctity 
of the Shastras. Why this duplicity ? Because they feel that if the masses are emancipated 
from the yoke of Caste they would be a menace to the power and prestige of the 
Brahmins as a class. The dishonesty of this intellectual class who would deny the masses 
the fruits of their thinking is a most disgraceful phenomenon. 


The Hindus in the words of Mathew Arnold are " wandering between two worlds, one 
dead, the other powerless to be born ". What are they to do ? The Mahatma to 'whom they 
appeal for guidance does not believe in thinking and can therefore give no guidance 
which can be said to stand the test of experience. The intellectual classes to whom the 
masses look for guidance are either too dishonest or too indifferent to educate them in the 
right direction. We are indeed witnesses to a great tragedy. In the face of this tragedy all 
one can do is to lament and say—such be thy Leaders, O! Hindus. 


Page: 69 
Antyajancha vital jyasi | Gangasnane shuddhatva tyasi Il - Eknathi Bhagavat, a. 28, 0. 191. 


Page: 69 
In this connection see illuminating article on Morality and the Social Structure by Mr. H. N. Brailsford in the Aryan 
Path for April 1936.

